
===PAGE 1===

===PAGE 2===
HAL Id: hal-02139218
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02139218
Submitted on 24 May 2019
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
The naval battle of Actium and the myth of the
ship-holder: the effect of bathymetry
Johan Fourdrinoy, Clément Caplier, Yann Devaux, Germain Rousseaux, Areti
Gianni, Ierotheos Zacharias, Isabelle Jouteur, Paul-Marius Martin, Julien
Dambrine, Madalina Petcu, et al.
To cite this version:
Johan Fourdrinoy, Clément Caplier, Yann Devaux, Germain Rousseaux, Areti Gianni, et al.. The
naval battle of Actium and the myth of the ship-holder: the effect of bathymetry. 5th MASHCON
- International Conference on Ship Manoeuvring in Shallow and Confined Water with non-exclusive
focus on manoeuvring in waves, wind and current, Flanders Hydraulics Research; Maritime Technology
Division, Ghent University, May 2019, Ostend, Belgium. WWC007 (pp 104 - 133). ￿hal-02139218￿
===PAGE 3===
THE NAVAL BATTLE OF ACTIUM AND THE MYTH OF THE SHIP-HOLDER:  
THE EFFECT OF BATHYMETRY 
 
Johan Fourdrinoy, Clément Caplier, Yann Devaux and Germain Rousseaux, CNRS – Université de Poitiers – ISAE-
ENSMA - Institut Pprime, France 
Areti Gianni and Ierotheos Zacharias, University of Patras, Greece 
Isabelle Jouteur, Université de Poitiers, Forellis France 
Paul Martin, Université de Montpellier, France 
Julien Dambrine, Madalina Petcu  and Morgan Pierre, Université de Poitiers, Laboratoire de Mathématiques et 
Applications, France. 
 
SUMMARY  
 
A myth of antiquity is explained with modern science in the context of an ancient naval battle. A legend was invoked by 
the admiral Pliny the Elder to explain the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra against Octavian at the naval battle  of Actium. 
A fish, called echeneis or remora, is said to have the power to stop ships or to delay their motion by adhering to the hull. 
Naturalists have since studied how the fish sucking -disk with its typical pattern of parallel striae sticks to its host . Here 
we show the pattern of the free surface measured in a towing tank in the wake of an ancient galley is similar to the striae 
pattern of the fish. We have measured the bathymetry at the mouth of the Ambracian Gulf that influenced the physical 
environment of the battle. The computations demonstrate the increase of wave resistance of a galley as a function of the 
draft to the water depth ratio in shallow water corresponding to the appearance of a particular wake pattern: the echeneidian 
free surface pattern. 
 
NOMENCLATURE [SUMMARY] 
 
α  Wake angle (°) 
An = T/h Antonian number  
B  Beam (m) 
CF  Friction coefficient (N) 
Frh = U/√𝑔ℎ Froude depth number 
FrL = U/√𝑔𝐿 Length Froude number 
g  Gravity of Earth (m/s²) 
h Depth (m) 
𝑘 = √𝑘𝑥2 + 𝑘𝑦2 Wavelength (m-1) 
kx  Longitudinal wavelength (m-1) 
ky  Transversal wavelength (m-1) 
L   Length of ship (m) 
λ  Linear scale of ship model 
ω  Pulse wave (rad/s) 
m  Blockage parameter 
ν  kinematic viscosity (m²/s) 
Rt  Total resistance (N) 
Rv  Viscosity resistance (N) 
Rw  Wave making resistance (N) 
Re = VL/ν Reynolds number 
  Density of water (kg/m3) 
S  Wetted surface (m²) 
σ  Surface tension (kg/s²) 
T Draft (m) 
tW  Water temperature (°C) 
Vm  Model speed (m/s) 
VR  Real-scale speed (knots) 
UKCm   Under keel clearance 
W  Tank width 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
 
September 2, 31 BC was a turning point for the ancient 
world, and an enigma for historians and scientists of all 
times. That day , the confrontation of Antony and 
Cleopatra against Octavian took place, near Actium in the 
Ambracian Gulf, the epilogue of the Civil War between 
the Western Roman world and the Eastern Oriental world. 
Antony, with his heavy fleet composed among others of 
decaremes, faces Octavian and his light fleet composed 
among others of triremes. Two mysterious anomalies 
disrupt the unfolding of history: Antony remains 
inexplicably motionless for three hours at the exit of the 
Gulf, then, instead of charging forward to break through 
the opposing lines, he fails to pick up speed.  This forced 
him to adopt combat tactics involving getting close to the 
enemy in order to board their vessels for which his large 
boats were ill-suited. The ancient sources which mention 
these anomalies either give no explanation at all or give 
explanations which are less than convincing. E verything 
seems to point to Antony's fleet first having been 
compelled to remain motionless and then to Antony's 
having had to choose the least promising combat tactics. 
The explanation usually given by historians and modern 
philologists is that Antony expected wind to rise from the 
land; then, his fleet, having repelled that of Octavian, 
could sail off covering Cleopatra who stayed in the rear 
(Antony's rear fleet was a priority, because it was carrying 
the war booty). In contrast to the use of naval combat, the 
fleet of Antony had left the masts and sails lying on the 
deck of the ship - which has not been easy manned on 
board, but would allow, when the time comes, to prepare 
masts and sails to escape and to be sure of not being caught 
by the enemy ships, equipped to fight, that is to say, only 
with oars. Things did not go as planned: the collapse of 
Antony’s frontline helped the admiral of Octavian, 
Agrippa, to attack the isolated part of Antony’s vessels. In 
Section 9.1 with supplementary information on An cient 
History, the reasons for the long immobility of the fleet of 
Antony are examined. We have a clue that this immobility 
was not expected: the surprise of the opponents. As 
===PAGE 4===
Octavian certainly knew the plan of Antony and the tactics 
he would adopt. He is  surprised to see him sitting still. 
Another clue, less pronounced, is Antony’s customary 
haranguing of his board troops and crews by moving along 
the front of the ship, but he did this on a small boat, and 
not - as one would have expected - from his flagship. The 
purpose was indeed to harangue the troops from a 
dominant position. In a small boat however, the leader is 
not in a dominant position… (Carter, 1970; Martin, 1995; 
Lange, 2011; Murray 2012). The explanation of these 
events are much written about, and (Tarn, 1931 ) warned 
us “The true history of Antony and Cleopatra will 
probably never be known; it is buried too deep beneath the 
version of the victors”. A legend was invoked by Pliny the 
Elder (Pliny the Elder, 1857) (the naturalist and the 
admiral of the western Roman navy in the first century) to 
explain the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra against 
Octavian. A fish, called echeneis or remora and ship -
holder or sucking-fish nowadays, is said to have the power 
to stop ships or to delay their motion by ad hering to the 
hull (Jouteur, 2009) . Some scientists have brought other 
reasoning and arguments: biofouling; rudder effect 
turbulent brake; dead -water in deep water… Gudger 
(Gudger, 1918) even concluded his review of these 
explanations with the definite sta tement that “another 
myth of the ancients is dissipated in thin air”.  
A research project has been set up to defy t his point of 
view by analysing three new scientific reasons for the 
difficulties in manoeuvring by analysing the effect of 
shallow water only , stratification in shallow water and 
ship squat. In this introducing work on a scientific study 
of the battle of Actium, this paper focuses exclusively on 
the first effect . The bathymetry at the mouth of the 
Ambracian Gulf that influenced the physical environment 
of the battle has been measured and is described in Section 
2. The Section 3 of the papers contains mathematical 
computations that demonstrate the increase of wave 
resistance of a galley with a draft of the order of the water 
depth in shallow water corresponding to the appearance of 
a so-called “echeneis” free surface pattern.  
 
2 BATTLE’S CONDITIONS 
2.1 THE OCEANOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS 
OF THE AMBRACIAN GULF 
 
“Oceanographic research in the Amvrakikos Gulf in 
Western Greece, a semi -enclosed embayment iso lated 
from the Ionian Sea by a narrow, shallow sill, has shown 
that it is characterized by a fjord -like oceanographic 
regime” (Ferentinos et al, 2010). The entrance of the 
Ambracian Gulf, i.e. the area where the Actium Battle 
took place, limits the gulf’s communication with the open 
Ionian Sea. It is a particularly shallow and narrow area 
(see Section 9.4 with supplementary information on 
oceanography).  
The bathymetric map  (Hellenic …, 1982)  was used to 
reconstruct the bathymetry of the area where the Acti um 
battle was held. The map’s data were digitized and 
projected in the WGS 1984 - UTM 34N coordinate 
system. The map’s data combined with bathymetric data, 
that where recovered during two sampling cruises in 
September – October 2012 period. Depth measureme nts 
were made along 10 transects and 20 points, uniformly 
distributed in the area of interest.  
In order to reconstruct the bathymetry (explained in 
Section 9.4 with supplementary information on 
Oceanography) at the gulf’s entrance in 31 BC, when the 
battle occurred, basic modifications to the current map 
were made. These modifications were based on: a) the 
relative sea level changes during the last 2000 years and; 
b) the morphological changes due to human interventions 
in the area over the last decades. The dredging of a 
navigational channel during the 1970s, changed the area’s 
bathymetry as well as its hydrodynamics and its 
sedimentation processes. These changes resulted in 
morphological structures formation, which were identified 
and removed during the ba thymetry reconstruction. In 
addition, based on literature and observations data, it was 
concluded that the average sea level during the battle was 
75 cm lower than the current one (Lambeck and Purcell, 
2005). This was also considered for the ancient 
bathymetry reconstruction.  Decaremes (namely the 
biggest boats at Actium, see below), with a draft of 2.1 m, 
have been limited in their position. Indeed, part of the 
entrance has a depth of less than 2.5 m. 
 
 
Figure 1. The bathymetric map of the Ambracian 
Gulf entrance 2000BP. 
 
2.2 RECONSTRUCTION OF AN ANCIENT 
GALLEY MODEL 
 
Laboratory experiments have been carried out in order to 
reproduce the assumed configuration of the battle. The 
water level, vessel's speeds and dimensions have been 
determined using the aforementioned bathymetry 
measurements, naval archeo -architecture inputs and 
historical reports of the battle (see Section 9.1 with 

===PAGE 5===
supplementary information on ancient history and Section 
9.3 with supplementary information on naval 
architecture). Both fleets in presence at Actium had very 
different characteristics with respect to naval architecture. 
Hence, we decided to take as representative classes of 
boats for the two fleets: a trireme for Octavian and a 
decareme for Antony, both featuring the Athlit ram. 
According to (Murray et al., 2017), the Athlit ram wou ld 
belong to a class 4. However, because of the reduced size 
of our warship model in the experiments, differences in 
the ram’s geometry and epoch would be negligible at these 
scales.  
It seems there is a consensus around the naval plans of a 
trireme with a slight variation depending on the period: the 
fifth-century BC trireme Olympias has dimensions a little 
bit smaller than the triremes present during the first 
century BC Actium battle. Unfortunately, there is no 
historical evidence for the real dimensions of a decareme. 
As a matter of fact, the boat classes bigger than 5 were no 
more built after the battle of Actium, principally because 
of Antony’s defeat.  
 
Figure 2. The small scale model of the Greek galley 
used in the experiments. 
 
The geometry of the reduced model was based on the hull 
lines of the trireme Olympias generously provided by the 
Trireme Trust (Figure 2). At the water line, the ship model 
is 120 cm long and 13.5 cm wide. The draft is around 3,9 
cm, depended of configurations (trireme or dec areme), 
and the T/h ratio. The ram geometry was reverse 
engineered by (Murray, 2012) and the Institute for 
Visualization of History. As we use the same model to 
study the trireme and decareme behaviours, we scale the 
experiments using scaling laws (Table 1). The Olympias 
trireme is 32.08 m long, 3.43 m wide, with a 1.05m draft 
at waterline, and as presented in the main text we suppose 
that decaremes were twice as big, so the respective 
scaling-factor for the lengths is 26.73 for the trireme 
configuration an d 53.47 for the decareme one. 
Considering the bathymetric data presented in the 
supplementary information on Oceanography, we chose 3 
meters as a representative mean water depth at the outlet 
of the Ambracian Gulf, when corrected for the change in 
the water level since the battle. Hence, the water height in 
the towing tank was set to 11.22 cm for the trireme 
configuration and 5.61 cm for the decareme configuration 
(so the underkeel clearance  is respectively 7.27 cm and 
1.68 cm). The model speeds have been Froude depth 
numberscaled with (water depth) Froude number . 
Experiments were carried out for the height and length 
Froude numbers values indicated in the table below. The 
speed values are given in meter per second for the model 
and in knots for a real -scale vessel. During the 
experiments, the water temperature was about 21°C. Calm 
water resistance tests with a small-scale trireme model had 
already been carried out in the past by Grekoussis and 
Loukakis (Grekoussis and Loukakis, 1985, 1986) with a 
3.2 m long small-scale model in a water depth of 3 m. The 
range of the Froude numbers Fr L was between 0.090 and 
0.397, corresponding to Froude depth number s Fr h 
between 0.093 and 0.410. Given these values we can assert 
that their experiments were performed in deep wa ter 
conditions and they did not focus on shallow water effects. 
The choice of the 1.2m length for our small -scale model 
allows us to explore a wider range of Froude depth 
numbers (between 0.3 and 1.63), while staying under the 
limit length Froude number Fr L=0.5 recently highlighted 
by (Rabaud and Moisy, 2013; Noblesse et al. 2014) from 
which the angle of the wake starts to decrease (an effect 
already present in deep water). Hence the maximum of 
wave resistance measured corresponding to the 
appearance of a s hallow water wake pattern  and not to 
another phenomenon.  In battle conditions, if boats were 
in compact formation, a lateral confinement effect (as in 
tank) can be envisaged. There would be interference 
between the wakes, which will be the subject of a future.  
The limitations of the reduced model were studied in 
section 9.6. 
 
Table 1. Significant values for trireme and decareme with reduced and real scales. MS=model scale / RS=real scale. 
 Trireme RS Trireme MS Decareme RS Decareme MS 
𝜆 (ratio scale) 26.73 53.47 
𝐿 (length) 32.08 m 1.2 m 64.15 m 1.2 m 
𝐵 (beam) 3.6 m 13.5 cm 7.2 m 13.5 cm 
𝑇 (draft at midship) 1.05 m 3.93 cm 2.10 m 3.93 cm 
h (depth) 3 m 11.2 cm 3 m 5.6 cm 
UKC (under keel clearance) 1.95 m 7.2 cm 0.9 m 1.68 cm 
An = T/h 0.35 0.35 0.70 0.70 
W (tank width) Min: 5×B=18 m 
(compact formation) 1.49 m Min: 5×B=36 m 
(compact formation) 1.49 m 
m (blockage parameter) 0 0.013 0 0.026 
V (boat speed) 5 knots 0.50 m. 𝑠−1 5 knots 0.35 m. 𝑠−1 
V (boat speed) 10 knots 1.00 m. 𝑠−1 10 knots 0.70 m. 𝑠−1 

===PAGE 6===
3 PHYSICAL COMPARISON OF TRIREME 
AND DECAREME CONFIGURATIONS  
3.1 MATHEMATICAL COMPUTATIONS OF THE 
WAVE RESISTANCE OF ANCIENT 
GALLEYS 
 
From naval architectural data and  based on Sretensky’s 
analytical formulation (Sretensky, 1 936), it is possible to 
calculate a prediction of wave making resistance of an 
ancient galley  based on linear theory . Because of the 
importance of the ships design in the battle of Actium, we 
took into account the actual shapes of the galleys. Until 
now, numerical computations of the wave resistance with 
Sretensky’s formula involving real ship hulls were made 
by using polynomial representation or uniform grids. In 
our case, the ships exhibit details at different scales. This 
led us to use meshes with triang ular elements, refined in 
areas of finer details such as the ram at the bow of the ship 
(see Section 9.5 with supplementary on mathematics). The 
theoretical predictions of Sretensky require to be in 
shallow water configuration, without significant hydraulic 
effects ( water level drawdown and return current) 
(Pompée, 2015). The numerical calculations present in 
Figure 3, were carried out for trireme or decareme 
configurations, and by varying the Antonian number 
An=T/h. As observed by (Russell, 1839 ; Inui, 1954), we 
observe a peak of resistance for Fr h = 1 whose magnitude 
grows with An. To this resistance we can add a viscous 
resistance due to the friction of the boat with the water. 
This viscous resistance can be predicted by the (ITTC, 
1957) protocol. By addi ng these two components of 
resistance (wave and friction), we obtain a total resistance 
according to the speed, the geometry (decareme or 
trireme), and the Antonian number (Figure 3). See SI on 
Mathematics for curves showing viscous and wave 
contributions for each configuration. 
Using the measured bathymetry and the previous 
computations, and last results, we infer the theoretical 
wave making resistance of both the trireme and decareme 
in various points of the mouth of the Ambracian Gulf. The 
results of our  predictions on total resistance are summed 
up in the two maps shown in the Figure 4. Our maps were 
computed for two velocities: 7 knots (left figure) and 10.5 
knots (right figure), so Frh=1 when h=3 m. The latter being 
typical of a ramming manoeuver where as the former 
corresponds to the cruising speed. These maps show in 
colours RD/RT, i.e. the ratio between the total resistance 
applied to a decareme and the one applied to a trireme in 
each point of the Ambracian Gulf . Our  measured 
bathymetric data are plotted with line contours (in white), 
and three particular areas are highlighted: the shallow 
zone inaccessible for the decareme (in grey), the shallow 
zone inaccessible for both the trireme and the decareme 
(in black), and the land (in brown). At the cruisi ng speed 
of 7 knots, our calculations predict a wave resistance ratio 
close to 1, almost uniformly on the battlefield, which 
means that no particular ship has an advantage when its 
velocity is lower than the ramming velocity ( see Section 
9.5 with supplemen tary on m athematics). At this speed, 
the viscous resistance is the main component of the total 
resistance. Hence, the factor 4 as explained in the SI which 
is mostly compensated by the ratio in the number of 
rowers 605/170=3.56. Thus, the larger wetted surface of a 
decareme is compensated by a greater rowing power. The 
trap is a confinement effect, not a simple viscous effect. 
At the ramming speed of 10.5 knots, the wave resistance 
ratio is much higher and the RD/RT can go up to, forming 
a bottleneck zone a t the entry of the gulf. This result 
confirms the idea that ramming may have been impossible 
for Antony's ships in the particular entrance zone of the 
Ambracian Gulf and hence answers to the second anomaly 
underlined by the historical reports namely the 
impossibility to use the ramming tactic.  
 
Figure 3.  Calculated total resistances, 
composed by a wave making resistance and 
a viscous resistance, as a function of Fr h for 
a varying ship draft to depth ratio. 
 

===PAGE 7===
 
Figure 4. Maps featuring the ancient bathyme try and theoretical predictions of total resistance ratio R D/RT  for 
two different velocities: 7 knots (left) and 10.5 knots (right). For the attack speed of 10.5 knots, 
decareme’s resistance RD is two to ten times larger than the trireme’s resistance R T. The colormap has 
been limited to 5 to make the results more visible, however, in a small area at the entrance of the channel, 
the ratio RD/RT may increase up to a factor 10 at 10.5 knots (see SI on Mathematics for an unlimited 
colormap). 
 
3.2 THE SURFACE WAKES OF AN ANCIENT 
GALLEY 
 
Experiments are carried out in a towing tank 20 m long 
and 1.49 m wide. The model, placed in the middle of the 
tank, is fixed to prevent any degree of liberty, and test only 
the impact of the draft. The top -view of wake is recorded 
by fast camera at 125 Hz.  The wake pattern of the ship 
gives a clue on the deep or shallow water configuration. 
Indeed, in deep water,  the usual Kelvin wake pattern, 
featuring a V shape, has a constant angle at 19.47°. From 
FrL ≈ 0.5, the angle should dim inish with the Froude 
number based on the length of the boat . (Rabaud and 
Moisy, 2013) propose a decrease according to 1 FrL⁄  while 
(Noblesse et al., 2014)  propose a decrease according to 
1
Fr𝐿
2⁄ . In shallow water, this angle is dependant of th e 
Froude depth number , reaching a maximum for Fr h =1 
(Havelock, 1908; Inui, 1936; Soomere, 2009; Ersan and 
Beji, 2013). On the top views, o ne observes two V -like 
wakes at the bow and the stern of the galley. Each wake is 
usually composed of a system of divergent and transverse 
waves, which superimpose and form the so -called cusp 
waves, defining an envelope corresponding usually to 
maximum wave heights (Darmon et al., 2013): here, we 
observe mainly the diverging wave system , as was 
observed in the trials of Olympias  in the ninet ies 
(Morrison et al., 2000). In addition, a turbulent wake is 
clearly seen behind the stern of the ship. There is  a 
measure of the wake angle in the spectral domain, from an 
image of the wake seen from above (Figure 6 and see 9.6.b 
for the methodology). The dispersion relation: 
0 = 𝑉𝑚
2𝑘𝑥
2 − (𝑔𝑘 + 𝜎
𝜌 𝑘3) tanh(𝑘ℎ) 
has an inflexion point , where the slope is directly 
connected to the angle (Carusotto and Rousseaux, 2013; 
Gomit, et al. 2014; Caplier 2015). The trireme and 
decareme configurations show the same evolution of the 
wake angle, corresponding to a shallow water regime 
(Figure 7). This validates the hypothesis necessary for the 
use of the Sretensky’s formula to be in shallow water in 
order to compute the wave resistance. 
For the decareme, an additional system of quasi -parallel 
waves of the divergent type appears in addition to the 
Kelvin wake pattern and superimposes to create another 
wake pattern starting roughly at Fr h=0.8 (Figure 8). The 
amplitude of this additional system of waves increases 
with respect to the speed of the ship until a Froude  depth 
number of 1.0, where they are the most visible. Pa st that 
Froude number, the value of the amplitude decreases with 
the speed, and the quasi -parallel waves bend toward the 
stern-wake (Figure 8). The Froude depth number  of 0.85 
corresponds to the real scale speed around 9 -10 knots, 
which was approximately t he attack speed of the galleys. 
In addition to this “echeneidian” wake -pattern, a double 
bow wave appears, only in the decareme configuration, 
with a similar behavior and a maximum amplitude reached 
for Frh=1.15 (Figure 9). The first wave (in green) presents 
an angle similar to a Mach cone, while the second (in red) 
does not seem linear. If the boat stops suddenly, the second 
wave unfolds and is ejected forwards (Figure 10). This 
behaviour is reminiscent of the shallow wave pattern of 
the free surface observed a long time ago by the engineer 
Scott Russell (Russell, 1839) who towed boats in a 
shallow canal of Scotland. On the contrary, the first wave 
(in green) remains folded. Thus, the first wave can be 
another shallow effect (amplified by a horizontal 
confinement). The second is due to a canal effect, so 
therefore absent at sea.  
The modification of the wake shape is known since then 
to be related to an enormous increase of wave resistance 
(Inui, 1954; Kirsch, 1966; Kostyukov, 1968). This typical 

===PAGE 8===
shallow water wake behind the galley is strikingly similar 
to the echeneis suction disk (Figure s 12, 13) that was 
reported to have appeared during the Actium battle when 
interpreting correctly Pliny’s and Octavian’s accounts, or 
as described by Elien (Elien, 1972): “For adhering with its 
teeth to the extreme stern of the ship driven by a following 
wind and full sails, just as an unmastered and unbridled 
horse is held in with a strong rein, so the fish overcomes 
the most violent onset of the winds and holds the ship as 
if tied fast to her wharf. [...] But the sailors understand and 
realize what ails the ship; and it is from this action that the 
fish has acquired its name, for those who have had 
experience call it the Ship-holder".  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Figure 6.  Left: Fast Fourier transform of the surface wake based on simple visualization with an aerial picture, in 
configuration decareme at Fr h=1.02. In red, the theoretical dispersion relation; in black the slope at the 
inflexion point. Right: Theoretical dispersion relation at Frh=1.02, in shallow and deep water 
configurations. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Measured wake angle (Kelvin 
angle) via spatial FFT, in configurations 
decareme and trireme, as a function of Fr h. 
Green T are measured in trireme 
configuration and blue D in decareme 
configuration. Black curve is the theoretical 
angle's behavior by (Havelock, 1908), valid 
for linear theory with an idealized point 
source. 
 
 
 
 
 
While the dimensionless number Frh, which is identical for 
trireme or decareme , only indicates a shallow water 
behavior, we use the Antonian number An=T/h, which 
drives the effect of strong vertical confinement. By 
adjusting this number, by increasing the draft, we observe 
a similar but amplified behavior of the particular wake 
pattern (Figure 1 1), as calculated by the f ormula of 
Sretensky (Figure 3). It is said that Antony’s boats loaded 
with both sails and war chest (Carter 1970; Martin, 1995; 
Lange, 2011), which would imply a stronger draft. 
In addition to these simple visualizations, the whole wave 
field behind the boat has been experimentally measured in 
the towing tank by a stereorefraction method (Caplier, 
2015; Gomit, 2013) (Figure 1 2). This method is based on 
the calculation of the surface undulations from the 
apparent deformation of a pattern (roughcast) placed o n 
the bottom of the towing tank. The refraction of light rays 

===PAGE 9===
at the water-air interface allows, through two cameras, to 
reconstruct a 3D visualization of the wake. This 
reconstruction of the free surface deformation due to the 
motion of the ship clearly h ighlights the non -classical 
wake pattern that has been observed and identified behind 
the decareme in the experiments. The complexity of the 
wake pattern would have been impossible to capture with 
classical intrusive local methods such as resistive or 
acoustic probes so it was necessary to use this state-of-the-
art optical method to measure the whole wake (more 
information in the SI on Fluid Mechanics). 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Evolution with Froude depth number of the wake pattern for a decareme configuration. Suppl ementary 
to usual Kelvin wake pattern, quasi -parallel waves of the divergent type appear from Fr h > 0.8. The 
amplitude of this additional system of waves increases with respect to the boat speed until a Frh =1. After, 
the value of the amplitude decreases with the speed, and this parallel waves bend toward the stern wake. 
The ship has no angle with the horizontal. 
 
 
Figure 9. Evolution with Froude depth number of the bow wave for a decareme configuration. A bow wake (in 
green) appears from a Frh ≈ 1. Its angle decreases according  to a Mach angle : 𝜶 = 𝐭𝐚𝐧−𝟏[Fr𝒉
𝟐 − 𝟏]
−𝟏
=
𝐬𝐢𝐧−𝟏[𝑭𝒓𝒉]−𝟏.  A second bow wave with a bigger amplitude (in red) appears in the front of the first.  

===PAGE 10===
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Top-views of bow wave ejections when the boat 
decelerates before stopping at the end of the run. The first 
bow wave (in green) keeps its slope and is a purely linear 
shallow effect. The second bow wave (in red) detaches from 
the prow and creates a solitonic wave à la Scott Rus sell 
(Scott Russell, 1939). The second wave is usually akin to a 
channel effect (not present in the open sea).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Top-views of the wake pattern of the ship for a trireme and a decareme at Frh=0.97. (A) Unlike the wake 
pattern of the trire me which is similar to the usual Kelvin wake pattern, in decareme configuration we 
observe the “echeneidian” pattern (quasi -parallel waves of the divergent type) superimposes with the 
deep water wakes and which create a complex wake pattern. The amplitude of this shallow waters wake 
increases with 𝑻/𝒉. (B) A bow wave appears in decareme configuration (not for a trireme) whose 
amplitude increases with 𝑻/𝒉.  

===PAGE 11===
 
Figure 12: The particular echeneidian wake behind the ship in the decareme configuration at Fr h=0.85, measured 
with the stereorefraction method in the towing tank. In this experiment the keel of the boat makes an 
angle of 0.13 ° with the horizontal (stern sunk) which is equivalent to an increase of an effective draft 
along the hull. 
 
4 DISCUSSION: THE SCIENTIFIC 
EXPLANATION OF THE LEGEND OF THE 
SHIP-HOLDER 
 
According to Albert Günther, “there is scarcely a fish of 
the existence of which the ancients have been equally 
certain, and which has so much occupied their 
imagination... as the Echeneis of the Greeks or Remora of 
the Latins” (Günther, 1860). With our interdisciplinary 
approach between human and fundament al sciences, we 
believe we can explain this famous myth of Antiquity: the 
battle of Actium, where an echeneis, the small fish which 
allegedly hampered ships and t riggered the interest of 
historians, writers and poets for twenty centuries. For 
example, Ovid in his Halieutica, says “The small echeneis 
is present, wonderful to say, a great hindrance to ships”. 
As we have seen in the introduction, this myth is invoked 
to explain, e.g., the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra against 
Octavian at the naval battle of Actium twenty centuries 
ago. The admiral Pliny the Elder reports: “At the battle of 
Actium, it is said, a fish of this kind stopped the Pretorian 
ship of Antony in  its course, at the moment that he was 
hastening from ship to ship to encourage and exhort his 
men, and so compelled him to leave it and go on board 
another. Hence it was, that the fleet of Ceasar ( Octavian) 
gained the advantage in the onset, and charged w ith a 
redoubled impetuosity” (Pliny the Elder, 1857).  
The issue of the origin of the echeneis tale, which is said 
to have detained Antony, is discussed in  Section 9.2 with 
supplementary information on Linguistics. According to 
the common opinion, the lege nd was created by the 
defenders of Antony and intended to explain the 
immobility of the flagship, and thus that the fleet did 
depend on the flagship’s moves. For our part, we believe, 
on the basis of a number of indications contained in the 
poetic exaltati on of the contemporary battle of Actium, 
that it is one of the themes of Augustan propaganda on this 
battle, which was exalted as the Principate epiphany. The 
legend of echeneis is prior to Actium and it was applied to 
the excitement of the battle, to show  that the gods and 
nature itself were on the "good side", that of Octavian. It 
is known that Octavian Augustus, after the battle, founded 
the town of Nicopolis ad Actium; on this forum stood, as 
in Rome, a forum rostra (one can see the remains today) 
adorned with the rams of several Antonians ships (Murray, 
2012), including probably the flagship of Antony 
(abandoned by him for a faster one, a quinquereme, at the 
time of flee). Our hypothesis is that when the ship was 
lifted from the water in order to recove r the rostrum, an 
echeneis was found attached to the hull and this served to 
support the activation of the legend. The fish is known to 
stick to rock or boat in bad weather and the Actium battle 
happened after four days of storms. Plutarch gives details 
on the progress of the naval battle: “Caesar (Octavian)… 
was astonished to see the enemy lying motionless in the 
narrows; indeed, their ships had the appearance of riding 
at anchor” (Plutarch, 1988). One of the possible 
interpretation of the use of the word anchor relies on the 
legend of the “echeneis” from echein- (to hold) and -naus 
(the ship). Pliny the Elder, who was a naturalist and natural 
philosopher as is well known nowadays but also the 
Admiral of the fleet of Mycene in the Mediterranean Sea 
which is  less known, gave an explanation for the 
difficulties that the galleys of Antony had to struggle with 
during the naval confrontation by invoking the Greek 
myth. The fish, called echeneis in Greek or remora in Latin 
is said to have the power to stop ships or to delay (“mora” 
in Latin) their motion by adhering to its stern. Naturalists 
have since studied the way in which the haustellum (a 
sucking-disk with a typical pattern of parallel striae) of the 
fish exerts an enormous pressure on its host (sharks, 
turtles, whales, boats, scuba divers, etc.). For Pliny’s 
translator, J. Bostok, the echeneidian myth is “an absurd 
tradition, no doubt, invented, probably to palliate the 
disgrace of defeat”. But for others, the authority of Pliny 
the Elder (and subsequent comm entators) is such that he 
would not have relied on such a tale even to protect the 
reputation of Antony and Cleopatra.  
The purpose of this work has been to provide a visual 
explanation of the legend  (Figures 12, 13)  which 
corresponds to the naval difficulties met by the A ntonian 
fleet based on scientific clues. Hence, we have displayed 
for the first time the visual signature of the Ancient myth 
of the echeneis, which answers the first anomaly noticed 
by the historians in the introduction and substantiates the 
legend for the linguists.  

===PAGE 12===
 
Figure 13.  Illustration of Echeneis naucrates 
(Grandidier, 1885).  The lips (blue) can 
represent the bow wave s, and the sucking 
disk pattern (red) can represent the 
particular echeneidian wake pattern. 
 
5 CONCLUSIONS 
 
For the first time since  twenty centuries, we have shown 
conclusively that the global pattern of the free surface 
measured in this work with modern and non -intrusive 
optical methods in the wake of an ancient galley moving 
in shallow waters is similar to the pattern of striae on t he 
sucking-disk of the echeneis fish. Hence, the Antonian 
boats have been influenced by a physical echeneis and not 
a biological one during the battle of Actium. From the 
analysis of the resistance charts, we have demonstrated 
that the Antonian fleet was u nable to use the ramming 
tactics because the wave resistance was increased up to ten 
times compared to the Octavian fleet. By a strange 
coincidence (or maybe not a hazard?), several centuries 
later another naval battle at the same location produces the 
same astonishment for the final result: Preveza battle in 
1538, where the Ottoman forces fought against the 
Christian navy and, to the general surprise, won. The 
Ottoman fleet under the command of Barbarossa with the 
smallest boats albeit considered as inferi or, prevailed. 
Another possible explanation for the boats difficulty in 
manoeuvres is the dead-water phenomenon, which can be 
encountered, for example, in the Northern fjords where ice 
melting creates two water layers of different densities, 
with a sharp interface between fresh and saline water (see 
Section 9.4 with supplementary on oceanography  and 
Ekman, 1904; Grue, 2015; 2016; Esmaeilpour, 2017). The 
resulting wave resistance exerted on moving boats is 
significantly increased by the generation of internal waves 
at the interface. Hence, our future goal will be to compute 
theoretically the wave resistance in a two -layer shallow 
water basin since the mouth of the Ambracian gulf has a 
shallow fjord recirculation. In the laboratory experiments, 
we will measure  the wave resistance of ship models 
(corresponding to the Actium and Preveza battle) moving 
in our towing tank at different density stratifications. In 
addition, confinement effects like water level drawdown, 
return current, ship squat will be examined as well. Thus, 
we hope to shed light on the History of these two naval 
battles with the help of Contemporary Science… With 
respect to the biological remora, it is unable to explain, of 
course, the drag on the boat (see Beckert et al., 2016 for a 
recent study on the fluid dynamics of an attached remora) 
… We anticipate our work will allow a revisit by 
historians of the events and by linguists of the legend as 
well as open new perspectives on battles with similar 
conditions like the one of Preveza in 1538. 
 
6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This research was funded by the CNRS Interdisciplinary 
Mission in 2013 (INSIS/INSHS co -funding), by the 
Poitiers University through two successive two -years 
funding (ACI UP on Wave Resistance 2013 -2014 and 
ACI Pprime on Actium 2014 -2015) and by the Patras 
University (Inland & Coastal Water Laboratory). The 
authors are indebted to William Murray and the Institute 
for Visualization of History for sharing their 3D plans of 
the Athlit rostrum and those of the temple in Nicopolis. 
The hull lines of the galley were provided by the Trireme 
Trust and we thank Doug Pattison for discussions on 
naval architecture. Christian Oddon from Cabinet Mauric 
translates the drawn hull lines of John Coates into 
numerical lines with modern softwares of naval 
architecture. The reduced model was built by Formes & 
Volumes in La Rochelle. We thank the services of 
metrology, computer sciences , electronics and the 
mechanical workshop of the Pprime Institute in Poitiers 
for helping in the course of experiments. The support o f 
Michel Briand is gratefully acknowledged. We thank the 
former and current directors of the Pprime Institute and of 
the LMA.  This work benefited from the support of the 
project OFHYS of the CNRS 80 Pprime initiative in 2019.   
 
7 REFERENCES 
 
Beckert, M., Flammang, B.E., Anderson, E.J., Nadler, 
J.H., 2016. Theoretical and computational fluid 
dynamics of an attached remora (Echeneis 
naucrates). Zoology 119, 430–438. 
Caplier, C., 2015. Etude expérimentale des effet s de 
hauteur d’eau finie, de confinement latéral et de 
courant sur les sillages et la résistance à 
l’avancement des navires. Université de Poitiers. 
Carlson, D.N., 2002. Caligula’s floating palaces -
archaeologists and shipwrights resurrect one of the 
emperor’s Sumptuous pleasure boats. 
Carter, J.M., 1970. The battle of Actium: the rise & 
triumph of Augustus Caesar. Hamish Hamilton. 
Carusotto, I., Rousseaux, G., 2013. The Cerenkov effect 
revisited: from swimming ducks to zero modes in 
gravitational analogues,  in: Analogue Gravity 
Phenomenology. Springer, pp. 109–144. 
Chatellier, L., Jarny, S., Gibouin, F., David, L., 2013. A 
parametric PIV/DIC method for the measurement of 
free surface flows. Exp. Fluids 54, 1488. 
Coates, J.F., 1989. The trireme sails again. S ci. Am. 260, 
96–105. 
D’Amato, R., Rava, G., 2015. Republican roman warships 
509-27 BC, New Vanguard. Bloomsbury 
Publishing. 
Darmon, A., Benzaquen, M., Raphaël, E., 2013. A 
solution to the Kelvin wake angle controversy. J. 
Fluid Mech. 73, 8. 

===PAGE 13===
Doutreleau, Y., Jodet, L., Laurens, J.-M., 2011. Résistance 
et propulsion du navire. Ellipses. 
Ekman, V.W., 1905. The Norwegian North polar 
expedition, 1893 -1896: scientific results. 
Longmans, Green and Company. 
Ersan, D.B., Beji, S., 2013. Numerical simulation of 
waves generated by a moving pressure field. Ocean 
Eng. 59, 231–239. 
Esmaeilpour, M., Martin, J.E., Carrica, P.M., 2018. 
Computational Fluid Dynamics Study of the Dead 
Water Problem. J. Fluids Eng. 140, 31203. 
Ferentinos, G., Papatheodorou, G., Geraga, M., Iatrou, M., 
Fakiris, E., Christodoulou, D., Dimitriou, E., 
Koutsikopoulos, C., 2010. Fjord water circulation 
patterns and dysoxic/anoxic conditions in a 
Mediterranean semi -enclosed embayment in the 
Amvrakikos Gulf, Greece. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 
88, 473–481. 
Gomit, G., 2013. Développement de techniques de mesure 
de surfaces libres par moyens optiques: Application 
à l’analyse de l’écoulement généré par un modèle de 
bateau en bassin des carènes. Poitiers. 
Gomit, G., Chatellier, L., Calluaud, D., David, L., 2013.  
Free surface measurement by stereo-refraction. Exp. 
Fluids 54, 1540. 
Gomit, G., Rousseaux, G., Chatellier, L., Calluaud, D., 
David, L., 2014. Spectral analysis of ship waves in 
deep water from accurate measurements of the free 
surface elevation by optical  methods. Phys. Fluids 
26, 122101. 
Gotman, A.S., 2002. Study of Michell’s integral and 
influence of viscosity and ship hull form on wave 
resistance. Ocean. Eng. Int. 6, 74–115. 
Grandidier, A., 1885. Illustration of Echeneis naucrates. 
Hist. la Géographie Madagascar. 
Grekoussis, C., Loukakis, T., 1986. AAthenian trireme: 
calm water resistance tests with ram at trimmed 
conditions. Rep. No. NAL. 
Grekoussis, C., Loukakis, T., 1985. Athenian Trireme 
Calm Water Resistance Tests Without Ram. Rep. 
No. NAL. 
Grue, J. , 2015. Nonlinear dead water resistance at 
subcritical speed. Phys. Fluids 27, 82103. 
Grue, J., Bourgault, D., Galbraith, P.S., 2016. 
Supercritical dead water: effect of nonlinearity and 
comparison with observations. J. Fluid Mech. 803, 
436–465. 
Gudger, E.W., 1918. The myth of the ship-holder: studies 
in Echeneis or Remora. J. Nat. Hist. 2, 271–307. 
Günther, A., 1860. On the history of Echeneis. Ann. Mag. 
Nat. Hist. 5, 386–402. 
Havelock, T.H., 1908. The propagation of groups of 
waves in dispersive media, wi th application to 
waves on water produced by a travelling 
disturbance. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 81, 398–430. 
Hellenic navy hydrographic service of prevenza, 1982. 
Preveza Strait - Bay and Harbour (ca. 1:10.000). 
Inui, T., 1954. Wave-making resistance in shallow sea and 
in restricted water, with special reference to its 
discontinuities. J. Zosen Kiokai 1954, 1–10. 
Inui, T., 1936. On Deformation, Wave Patterns and 
Resonance Phenomenon of Water Surface due to a 
Moving Disturbance. Proc. Physico -Mathematical 
Soc. Japan. 3rd Ser. 18, 60–98. 
ITTC57, 1957. Testing and extrapolation methods: 
propulsion, performance propulsion test. 
Jouteur, I., 2009. Monstres et merveilles: Créatures 
prodigieuses de l’Antiquité. Les Belles lettres. 
Kirsch, M., 1966. Shallow water and c hannel effects on 
wave resistance. J Sh. Res 10, 164–181. 
Kostyukov, A.A., 1968. Theory of ship waves and wave 
resistance. 
Kountoura, K., Zacharias, I., 2014. Annual hypoxia 
dynamics in a semi-enclosed Mediterranean gulf. J. 
Mar. Syst. 139, 320–331. 
Lambeck, K., Purcell, A., 2005. Sea -level change in the 
Mediterranean Sea since the LGM: model 
predictions for tectonically stable areas. Quat. Sci. 
Rev. 24, 1969–1988. 
Lange, C.H., 2011. The battle of Actium: a 
reconsideration. Class. Q. 61, 608–623. 
le Sophiste, E., 1972. On the characteristics of animals. 
Macfarlane, G.J., Graham -Parker, K.J., 2018. Marine 
vessel wave wake: transient effects when 
accelerating or decelerating. J. Waterw. Port, 
Coastal, Ocean Eng. 145, 4018027. 
Martin, P.M., 1995. Antoine et Cléopâtre: la fin d’un rêve. 
Editions Complexe. 
Millward, A., 1986. Effect of shallow water on a 
mathematical hull at high subcritical and 
supercritical speeds. J. Sh. Res. 30, 85–93. 
Molland, A.F., Turnock, S.R., Hudson, D.A., 2017. Ship 
resistance and propu lsion. Cambridge university 
press. 
Morrison, J., 2016. Greek and Roman Oared Warships 
399-30BC. Oxbow Books. 
Morrison, J.S., Coates, J.F., Coates, J.F., Rankov, N.B., 
2000. The Athenian trireme: the history and 
reconstruction of an ancient Greek warship. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Murray, W., Murray, W.M., 2012. The age of titans: the 
rise and fall of the great Hellenistic navies. OUP 
USA. 
Murray, W.M., Ferreiro, L.D., Vardalas, J., Royal, J.G., 
2017. Cutwaters Before Rams: an experimental 
investigation into the origins and development of the 
waterline ram. Int. J. Naut. Archaeol. 46, 72–82. 
Noblesse, F., He, J., Zhu, Y., Hong, L., Zhang, C., Zhu, 
R., Yang, C., 2014. Why can ship wakes appear 
narrower than Kelvin’s angle? Eur. J. Mech. 46, 
164–171. 
Pitassi, M., 2012. The Roman Navy: Ships, Men & 
Warfare 350 BC-AD 475. Seaforth Publishing. 
Pitassi, M., 2011. Roman Warships. Boydell Press. 
Pliny the Elder, 1857. The Natural History, Bohn’s 
classical library. H. G. Bohn. 
Plutarch, n.d. Life of Antony. 
Pompée, P .-J., 2015. About modelling inland vessels 
resistance and propulsion and interaction vessel -
waterway. Key parameters driving 
===PAGE 14===
restricted/shallow water effects. Proceeding Smart 
Rivers 2015. 
Poulos, S.E., Kapsimalis, V., Tziavos, C., Paramana, T., 
2008. Origin and distribution of surface sediments 
and human impacts on recent sedimentary 
processes. The case of the Amvrakikos Gulf (NE 
Ionian Sea). Cont. Shelf Res. 28, 2736–2745. 
Rabaud, M., Moisy, F., 2013. Ship wakes: Kelvin or Mach 
angle? Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 214503. 
Robbins, A., Thomas, G.A., Renilson, M.R., Macfarlane, 
G.J., 2011. Subcritical wave wake unsteadiness. Int. 
J. Marit. Eng. 153, 153–161. 
Rousseaux, G., Maïssa, P., Mathis, C., Coullet, P., Philbin, 
T.G., Leonhardt, U., 2010. Horizon effects with 
surface waves on moving water. New J. Phys. 12, 
95018. 
Russell, J.S., 1839. Experimental Researches into the 
Laws of Certain Hydrodynamical Phenomena that 
accompany the Motion of Floating Bodies, and have 
not previously been reduced into conformity with 
the known Laws of the Resistance of Fluids. Earth 
Environ. Sci. Trans. R. Soc. Edinburgh 14, 47–109. 
Soomere, T., 2009. Long ship waves in shallow water 
bodies, in: Applied Wave Mathematics. Springer, 
pp. 193–228. 
Srettensky, L.N., 1936. On the wave-making resistance of 
a ship moving along in a canal. London, Edinburgh, 
Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci. 22, 1005–1013. 
Stigebrandt, A., 2001. Land -Sea Exchanges: Fjord 
circulation. Encycl. Oceanogr. 
Tarn, W.W., 1931. The battle of Actium. J. Rom. Stud. 21, 
173–199. 
Therianos, A.D., 1974. The geographical distribution of 
river water supply in Greece. Bull. Geol. Soc. 
Greece 11, 28–58. 
Variagin, M.A., 1972. Tides and tidal values of Greek 
harbours. Greek Hydrogr. Serv. Athens 117. 
 
8 AUTHORS BIOGRAPHY 
Johan Fourdrinoy  holds the current position of PhD 
student at University of Poitiers - Institut Pprime, France. 
His thesis is about wave-current interactions. His previous 
experience includes engineering fluid mechanics and the 
study of a wave maker. 
Clément Caplier holds the  current position of post -
doctoral researcher at the University of Poitiers - Institut 
Pprime, France specialized in optical measurement 
techniques for hydrodynamics. His previous experience 
includes an experimental thesis on the effects of finite 
water de pth, lateral confinement and current on ships 
wakes and drag. 
Yann Devaux holds the current position of teaching and 
research assistance  at University of Poitiers - Institut 
Pprime, France. His thesis is about the unsteady 
suspension of sediment. His previous experience includes 
the establishment of an experimental process for studying 
dead-waters. 
Areti Gianni is geologist – marine science researcher 
focusing on degraded ecosystems management and 
restoration. She is a technical consultant in OIKOM - 
Environmental Studies LTD and a postdoctoral researcher 
at the Patras University. Her research is focused in inland 
and coastal ecosystems’ hydrodynamics, 
biogeochemistry, eutrophication and anoxia. She is 
specialized in hydrodynamic and ecological modelling in 
inland and coastal waters, and in the development of 
management/restoration practices and techniques. 
Ierotheos Zacharias is an oceanographer focusing on 
marine ecosystem monitoring and restoration. He is an 
Associate Professor in the University of Patras,  Greece. 
His research is focused in inland and coastal ecosystems’ 
hydrodynamics, biogeochemistry, eutrophication and 
anoxia. He is specialized in hydrodynamic and ecological 
modeling in inland and coastal waters, and in the 
development of management/resto ration practices and 
techniques. 
Isabelle Jouteur holds the current position of Professor 
of Classics at University of Poitiers (Forellis). Her works 
focuses on Latin poetry of the Augustan period; she is 
interested in mythology and imagination with an 
anthropological point of view. Her previous experience 
includes the study of monsters and wonders in Greco -
Roman culture. 
Paul Martin  is Professor Emeritus of the University of 
Montpellier-III and Honorary President of the magazine 
Vita Latina. Specialist in the history of royal and 
republican Rome, he was particularly interested in the 
process of return to the monarchy that led to the imperial 
regime. As such, he had to deal with the founding battle of 
the August regime: the battle of Actium, including the 
strange phenomenon reported by several ancient sources: 
the immobilization of the ships of the fleet of Antony at 
beginning of this battle.  
Julien Dambrine holds the current position of Assistant 
Professor at the University of Poitiers. He is responsible 
for the prediction of the wave-making resistance shown in 
this article using actual antique galley hull shapes. His 
speciality is shape optimisation in the context of ship 
waves, which include the aforementioned predictions. 
Madalina Petcu  holds the current position of Associate 
Professor (maître de conférences, HDR) at University of 
Poitiers, Laboratoire de Mathématiques et ses 
Applications. She is member of the Partial Differential 
Equations team, working on the theoretical and numerical 
aspects of mathemat ical models in fluid dynamics and 
other models related to physics. She has also a full -time 
teaching duty, consisting of 192 hours of teaching for the 
Mathematics Department of Poitiers University. 
Morgan Pierre holds the current position of associate 
professor at University of Poitiers (France). He is 
responsible of the Partial Differential Equations team at 
the Laboratoire de Mathématiques Appliques (Department 
of Applied Mathematics). His previous experience 
includes work on optimisation of ship hulls an d wave 
resistance. 
Germain Rousseaux is a senior research scientist at 
CNRS – Institut Pprime, France.  He is a proponent of 
interdisciplinary studies like for example his recent works 
on analogue black holes with the meas urement of 
Hawking radiation in the laboratory. 
===PAGE 15===
9 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION 
9.1 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON 
ANCIENT HISTORY  
What follows is based on a critical examination 
of ancient sources relating the battle of Actium between 
Antony's and Octavian's fleets on 2nd September 31 BC 
at the entrance to the gulf of Ambracia. The main sources 
are Plutarch's Life of Antony, 61- 68 and Dio Cassius's 
Roman History, 50, 14 -35. Plutarch mentions one 
particular fact, which greatly puzzled those on Octavian's 
side. This happened before the battle when the two fleets 
were facing each other. Octavian and his admiral Agrippa 
were surprised to note that Antony's fleet remained at a 
standstill for at least three hours, until midday, instead of, 
as was customary in ancient times, attacking at dawn:  
« Caesar (Octavian) […] was atonished to see the enemy 
lying motionless in the narrows; indeed, their ships had 
the appearance of riding at anchor. For a long time he 
was convinced that it was really the case,  and kept his 
own ships at a distance of about 8 furlongs fr om the 
enemy. But it was now the sixth hour, and since a wind 
was rising from the sea, the soldiers of Antony became 
impatient of the delay, and, relying on the height and size 
of their own ships as making them unassailable, they put 
their left wing in mot ion. When Caesar saw this he was 
delighted, and ordered the right wing to row backwards, 
wishing to draw the enemy still farther out from the gulf 
and the narrows, and then to surround them with his own 
agile vessels and come to close quarters with ships which, 
owing to their great size and the smallness of their crews, 
were slow and ineffective (1). »   
In fact, it was more the crews' lack of experience which 
could be a real handicap and it did, indeed, hinder 
Antony's fleet during the battle as his ships had to move 
and turn in the midst of enemy vessels. On the contrary, 
the maneuver necessary for a forward attack using the 
rostra was well within the capability of inexperienced 
crews: all they had to do was to launch the ships at full 
speed straight ahead, towards the enemy -a good enough 
reason to opt for this tactic and yet Antony did not choose 
to do so. Plutarch suggests a possible explanation for this 
strange immobility: Antony would have been waiting for 
the wind to get up so as to take advantage of it to escape. 
Modern historians have religiously followed his lead in 
this matter and given this out as the reason for Antony's 
decision but the explanation doesn't hold together: at that 
time of the year the wind doesn't blow strongly enough to 
carry the ships forward before midday and Antony, who 
had been in the area for months, must have been aware of 
the fact. No doubt he intended to start waging battle in the 
morning and, at midday, when the wind got up, to "take 
off" and head for the open sea; that is  why -contrary to 
what was customary- he had had the sails taken on board 
so that no enemy vessel could escape him. Thus it was not 
on purpose or due to either of the two adversaries that the 
battle only started after midday and that it lasted so long 
that, according to Suetonius, Octavian was unable to 
disembark and had to spend the night on board.   
Consequently, this raises two questions. The first one, we 
have just asked: why did Antony wait three hours before 
opening hostilities? The second one is: why  didn't he 
attempt to ram the enemy? Why didn't he resort to using 
the weapon of choice in such cases? The huge rostra on 
his powerful vessels would have crushed the hulls of the 
enemy ships, most of which were of an inferior tonnage. 
Instead of that, he opted for the use of projectiles and the 
tactic of trying to board the enemy; his ships drew slowly 
forward until they were within fighting distance of his 
adversary's fleet.  
Here is what Plutarch writes:  « Though the struggle was 
beginning to be a close range, the ships did not ram or 
crush one another at all, since Antony’s owing to their 
weight, had no impetus, which chiefly gives effect to the 
blows of the beaks , while Caesar’s (Octavian) not only 
avoided dashing front to front against rough and hard 
bronze armour, but did not even venture to ram the 
enemy’s ships on the side.  (2)  » This explanation which 
we have already mentioned -see above- does not stand up 
under close scrutiny: in a frontal attack, the greater the 
bulk of the moving ship, the more serious the damage 
inflicted on the enemy . . . unless the frontal attack is 
handicapped not by the weight of the vessels but by the 
fact that they are unable to acquire enough impetus for the 
blows to be effective. But, when the enemy line is one and 
a half kilometers away, there is plenty of scope to reach 
the necessary speed, approximately 9 knots. Octavian's 
tactics are -given the lesser tonnage of his ships- as logical 
as Antony's are incomprehensible. Because, if we are to 
believe Plutarch and Dio Cas sius, Antony deliberately 
chose to keep his vessels at a standstill and then to use 
projectiles and try and board the enemy. As historians in 
antiquity are wont to do, they fictitiously recreate 
Antony's and Octavian's speeches before the battle. Here 
is what Plutarch has the former say: « Antony visited all 
his ships in a row-boat, exhorting the soldiers, owing to 
the weight of their ships, to fight without changing their 
position, as if they were on land. He also ordered the 
masters of the ships to receiv e the attacks of the enemy 
as if their ships were lying quietly at anchor, and to 
maintain their position at the mouth of the gulf, which 
was narrow and difficult. (3) »   
Dio Cassius has him make a similar sort of speech: « See 
the length and beam  of our vessels, which are such that 
even if the enemy’s were a match for them in number, yet 
because of these advantages on our side they could do no 
damage either by charging bows -on or by ramming our 
sides. For in the one case the thickness of our timbers, 
and in the other the very height of our ships, would 
certainly check them… »   
As for Octavian, this is what Dio Cassius has him say: « 
Will they not by their very height and staunchness be 
more difficult for their rowers to move and less obedient 
for their pilots? (4) »  
 But -let us say it once again- these are fictitious speeches 
and their function is none other than to cover up an 
incomprehensible anomaly in Antony's choice of tactics: 
because his ships were much bigger in size, he should 
===PAGE 16===
have opted for a f rontal attack -charging bows - and 
ramming the enemy- which would have been more likely 
to succeed and more deadly.  
Modern historians have paid little attention to this 
particular aspect. For the most part they have accepted the 
two explanations given by a ncient sources for Antony's 
absurd tactical decision:   
1. Antony's crews were not experienced enough. 
This is exactly why Antony shouldn't have chosen to fight 
at close quarters and to try and board his adversary's 
ships; it is the sort of tactic that requir es quick and 
complex maneuvers in order to taunt or to avoid the 
enemy who, actually, turned out to be much more 
proficient at it.  
2. Antony's ships were slow, heavy and unwieldy 
monsters. This statement is very likely to have been far 
from true although it has always been universally relayed. 
Florus, for instance, wrote:  
« [Antony’s ships] « having from 6 banks of oars to 9, and 
being mounted with towers and high decks, they moved 
along like castles and cities, while the sea groaned and 
the winds were fatig ued. Yet their magnitude was their 
destruction. (5)  ».  
Yet the rostra which have been excavated by 
archeologists in various parts of the Mediterranean and a 
study of the cavities in the rostra from Antony's vessels 
which adorn the Tropaeum erected by Octavian at Actium 
have revealed that the difference between triremes and 
decaremes is not mathematically proportionate. Thus, a 
decareme was not three times as long as a trireme but only 
twice as long, approximately. The difference resided 
mostly in the tonn age and so in the draught. Therefore, 
contrary to legend, Antony's largest vessels were not great 
monsters which were impossible to maneuver, even if 
they were less easy to move and turn than triremes or 
liburnae.  
This legend dates back to Antiquity. How did it originate? 
Its roots are certainly to be found in Augustan propaganda 
whose aim was to stress that victory over vessels 
presented as monstrous sea creatures had been obtained 
by ships built by and for men. But the primary reason why 
it was so widely believed is that in Plutarch's, Florus's and 
Dio Cassius's day -one or two centuries after the battle - 
big ships like those with 6 or 10 rowers per bench- hadn't 
been built in a long time. In fact, they hadn't been built 
since Actium because the Mediterra nean -mare nostrum-
, which was now at peace only required the attention of a 
"maritime police" made up of much smaller vessels. For 
Pliny, Vitruvius and Vegetius, living under the Emperors, 
the quinqueremes are the biggest ships there are. 
Doubtless, Anton y's largest vessels were, despite their 
size, quite effective in battle.  
Out of all this, two bare facts are worth noting: 1. Antony's 
ships remained motionless for a long time . 2. Then, they 
were difficult to move. Why? Two details in a text which 
I have already quoted -see above- cannot fail to intrigue: 
1. Why does Antony visit his ships in a row-boat in order 
to exhort his troops instead of cruising in front of his fleet 
in his command decareme? Indeed, it was contrary to 
common practice in ancient tim es for a leader to address 
his soldiers from below. It is as if Antony had been unable 
to use his flagship to move about. 2. Why does Plutarch 
have him tell his sailors to "mind the difficult mouth of the 
gulf "(6)? What particular dangers could have lurke d in 
this narrow channel that ships have to go through to leave 
the Ambracian Gulf and reach the open sea?  
The elements presented supra do not enable us to answer 
these last two questions nor those previously asked about 
the reason for Antony's ships bein g at a standstill and for 
his absurd tactics. Is it possible to go any further?  
It is necessary here to add to the file two pieces of 
evidence, which have so far gone more or less unnoticed. 
The first is a passage by the poet Propertius, a 
contemporary at the time of Actium. In an elegy written 
in 16 BC, he recalls this battle, which became the basis on 
which Augustus built his regime. Before the battle, 
Apollo is supposed to be addressing Augustus (Octavian) 
thus: « Do not fear that their ships are winged  with a 
hundred oars: their fleet rides an unwilling sea. (7) »  
 The language is certainly poetic with the oars being 
compared to wings but the main point, that which we must 
remember, is that the sea is unwilling to let Antony's fleet 
ride it.  
The other document to be added to the file is much more 
telling and it is quite surprising that it isn't mentioned 
more often. It is a passage by Dio Cassius: « When they 
(Antony’s soldiers) set sail at the sound of the trumpet, 
and with their ships in dense array drew up their line a 
little outside the strait and advanced no further , Caesar 
(Octavian) set out as if to engage with them, if they stood 
their ground, or even to make them retire. But when they 
neither came out against him on their side nor turned to 
retire, but remained where they were, and not only that, 
but also vastly increased the density of their line by their 
close formation, Caesar checked his course, in doubt 
what to do. He then ordered  his sailors to let their oars 
rest in the water, and waited for a time; after this he 
suddenly, at a given signal, led forward both the wings 
and bent his line in the form of a crescent, hoping to 
surround the enemy, or otherwise to breach their 
formation in any case. Antony, accordingly, fearing this 
flanking and encircling movement, advanced to meet it as 
best he could, and thus relunctantly joined battle with 
Caesar (8) »   
 This account is much more detailed than Plutarch's 
description of the same stage of the battle. It is also 
slightly different, probably because the original source is 
not the same. What we learn from it is that hardly had 
Antony's vessels come out of the narrows that they 
stopped moving, causing a "bottleneck" behind them. 
This unexpected turn of events surprised Octavian. 
Plutarch corroborate s this. Then, according to Dio 
Cassius, it was Octavian who was responsible for 
engaging; according to Plutarch, those responsible for 
engaging were Antony's troops because they were eager 
to fight. But, in any case, it was never Antony, Antony 
who was unwillingly compelled to do battle in conditions 
described as being less than favorable. In this passage, 
===PAGE 17===
there is no mention of a deliberate tactical choice on 
Antony's part to try and board the enemy; the way the 
battle was waged was obviously dictated by o utside 
circumstances with Antony behaving as if he were 
paralyzed.  
 To conclude, it seems very clear, after examining ancient 
sources, that something happened  which prevented 
Antony from launching, as was expected, his fleet against 
the adversary's fleet, taking advantage of the greater bulk 
of his ships to ram the enemy. Instead of which, he was 
forced, first of all, to remain for a long time at a standstill, 
to the great surprise of his adversaries, letting his vessels 
form a bottleneck behind his fronta l line. And then, 
afterwards, compelled by the enemy to do battle, he 
advanced slowly towards them, which made ramming 
impossible. All that remained for him to do, then, was to 
get close to his opponent's vessels and try and board them, 
hindered though he was by the sheer size of his ships. 
Contrary to what our sources would have us believe, he 
did not choose these tactics, but was compelled to use 
them for some unknown reason. The aim of this study is, 
indeed, to try to find out the truth about this unknow n 
reason.   
 
1. Plutarch, Life of Antony, 65 , 6 -8; cf. Cassius Dio, 
Roman History, 50, 23, 2  
2. Plutarch, Life of Antony, 66, 1  
3. Plutarch, Life of Antony,  65, 4  
4. Cassius Dio, Roman History, 50, 29, 2  
5. Florus, History of the Roman people, from Romulus to 
Augustus, 2, 21, 5  
6. Plutarch, Life of Antony,  65, 4  
7. Propertius, Elegies, 2, 16, 37-38; cf. 4, 6, 47-48  
8. Cassius Dio, Roman History, 50, 31, 3-5  
 
 
9.2 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON 
LINGUISTICS  
  
For several centuries, from Ancient Greece until the 16th 
century, it was said, and repeatedly so, that a small fish 
called echeneis had the magic power of holding back ships 
when it latched onto their hulls. Nineteenth century 
naturalists, such as B. G. de  Lacépède, took a rather 
caustic view of this ancient tale: “From th e days of 
Aristotle until the present this animal has been the object 
of constant attention; its shape has been examined, its 
habits have been observed and its physical characteristics 
have been scrutinized. Not only was it considered to 
possess magic prop erties, absurd abilities and ridiculous 
strength, but it was viewed as a striking example of the 
occult qualities dispensed by nature to its offspring. It 
appeared as a convincing proof of nature’s qualities, secret 
in their origins and in essence unknowab le; the fish was 
honored in the imagery of poets, in the analogies of 
orators, in travelers’ narratives and in naturalists’ 
descriptions. [...] How many fables and errors have been 
accumulated in such passages, which are also stylistic 
masterpieces?” (1) Nowadays, the spontaneous reaction is 
indeed to wonder how people could have believed in such 
improbable powers for so many centuries. One of the 
explanations is perhaps to be found in the argument put 
forward by the historian M. Bloch, (2) who takes the 
example of the remora (the Latin name of the echeneis) to 
demonstrate how, before the development of critical 
methods of checking information and witnesses in the 
reconstruction of history, the most intelligent minds 
accepted a given fact without questioning  its veracity. It 
was based on tradition, all the more so when those “facts” 
were handed down by renowned minds of the past. But 
while this may explain the transmission of the legend, it 
does not solve the mystery of its origin: where did the 
legend begin and when? What exactly was said about the 
echeneis in Ancient times? When was the fish first 
considered to possess such extraordinary powers? It is our 
intention to explore the context in which the legend was 
born through rigorous analysis of Ancient sourc es, in 
order to better understand the link between beliefs and 
their unavoidable imaginary elements, and knowledge: the 
facts and discourse which they gave rise to, the level of 
knowledge and, perhaps, their exploitation by the elite.  
Research into the oc currences of the substantive noun 
echeneis in Greek literature, and its Latin translations in 
the terms mora, and remora, also including the variants 
remeligo, and remirora, reveals the relative rarity of such 
texts: only fifteen or so authors in a corpus which 
covers a period from the 5 th century B.C. to the 7 th 
century A.D . The fish is mentioned in various works: 
naturalists’ descriptions of fish in natural history treatises 
or in didactic works (Aristotle, Ovid, Aelian and Oppian 
(3)); poetic embellishme nt (in Lucan’s writings, (4) for 
instance, where it appears as an ingredient in a magic 
potion); in a chapter from an encyclopaedia (Pliny the 
Elder (5) combines a descriptive passage of the fish with 
historical anecdotes and a commentary on its associated  
magical properties); a banquet anecdote (Plutarch 6); an 
allusion in the letters of a Roman statesman (Cassiodorus 
7); in the writings of later commentators (grammarians or 
Church Fathers eager to explain the complexity of the 
world through etymological e xplanations, or through the 
collection of pagan knowledge which was reinterpreted in 
the light of the greatness of the divine: Donatius, Servius, 
Isadore of Seville and Ambrose 8). In addition to the noun 
echeneis, the adjective echeneis, idos which carrie s the 
meaning “which stops or holds back vessels”, (in 
Aeschylus during the 5 th century B.C., Nonnos of 
Panopolis during the 5 th century A.D. and Theaetetus 
Scholasticus during the 6th century A.D. 9).  
This quick survey shows that the occurrences are 
somewhat marginal. The most defining text is without 
doubt that written by Pliny the Elder a few years after 
the Battle of Actium,  in which he insists on the strange 
immobilization of Mark Antony’s fleet during that 
historical event, attributing the cause to t he powerful 
action of the fish to which he gives the name mora, a noun 
which also means “a delay, or lateness” in Latin. Yet there 
are two striking elements: firstly, among Ancient 
historians who provide a detailed description of the Battle 
of Actium (Plutarch, Orosius Florus, Dion Cassius), none 
===PAGE 18===
explicitly mention the fish, not even Plutarch who refers 
to it in his Table Talk but not in his Life of Mark Antony ; 
secondly, there is a concentration of occurrences in the 1st 
century A.D., as regards the longer  descriptions (Ovid, 
Lucan, Pliny, Plutarch 10). The “legend of the echeneis” 
would appear to be a relatively late construction , 
containing several strata, the earliest of which goes back 
to Aristotle, with more frequent references clearly 
appearing from t he 1 st century A.D. onwards, in other 
words around the same time as the Battle of Actium. 
Aristotle does not indicate that the fish is able to hold back 
ships; historians writing before or at the same time as the 
battle between Mark Antony and Octavian do not see fit 
to mention it either. It is therefore tempting to postulate 
that the legend was born during the Roman recovery of a 
Greek belief (mainly transmitted through oral tradition) in 
the magic powers of the fish (Aristotle describes its use in 
making magic potions and to delay court trials and slow 
down justice), to which the Romans gave a new lease of 
life based on the events at Actium, in order to increase the 
marvellous powers of the fish.   
One way of disentangling the skein of suppositions is to 
carry out an analysis of the discourses which accompany 
references to the fish and its exceptional powers 
throughout classical and late Antiquity. These discourses 
are clustered around five poles which need to be 
considered in greater detail:  
magic, nature, reason, religion and politics.  
 
9.2 (a) Magic power.  
Chronologically, the first text which has been preserved is 
Aristotle’s (11) which mentions the use of the fish to slow 
down court trials and in the making of potions. Lucan (12) 
mentions it as an ingredient  for a resurrection spell in the 
description of witchcraft in Book 6 of the Pharsalia. Pliny 
(13) refers to the belief held by some Greeks that if worn 
as an amulet the fish prevents miscarriages or favours 
delivery at childbirth (in which case it is given  the name 
odinolytes). Pliny places the fish among the list of 
antiaphrodisiacs, (i.e. reducing amorous passion), along 
with “rhinoceros skin taken from the left forehead and 
attached in a lamb’s skin”. He also repeats Aristotle’s 
indications of its use for the making of potions (and more 
specifically erotic potions) and for court trials (to slow 
them down). We may therefore suppose that there was an 
idea of “mimetic” functioning despite the fact that the 
texts make no specific reference to this idea, and t here is 
no indication of whether there was a magus involved in 
ordering the action through magic formulas which might 
use the fish symbolically to obtain this effect, or whether 
the power of the fish is attributed to its physical 
characteristics, say of a magnetic nature. Might it be the 
case that people believed, by analogy, that the fish also 
had the extraordinary power to hold back ships to the 
extent that it could even slow them down to a complete 
standstill? The only document in which the holding back 
of a ship is explicitly linked to magic intervention is in one 
of the later texts, the Cyranides, a compilation of works 
on magic written between the 1 st and the 8 th centuries 
A.D., in which it is claimed that if just a few echeneis 
bones are sewn into horse leather and then brought aboard 
a ship, hidden in clothes, then the ship will not be able to 
move forward (14).  
We should not judge too quickly. Beyond the folklore of 
oral beliefs or popular traditions, magic did have a very 
real impact on people’s at titudes. The long defensive 
speech from the 2nd century A.D. in which Apuleius denies 
the charge of having charmed his wife by the use of magic, 
notably through the administering of a fish -based potion, 
provides sufficient proof of such beliefs (15).  Even Pliny, 
who shows himself to be sceptical as regards magic and 
who is keen to demystify the sham of magic at a time of 
firm belief, nevertheless describes some strange recipes, 
such as attaching a bramble-frog to the body in a piece of 
fresh sheep-skin, in order to put an end to love (16). Closer 
to our own subject, he also indicates that a boat can be held 
back by a no less irrational expedient: bringing the right 
foot of a tortoise on board (17) ! 
We need to return to one decisive element: the fish 
attaching itself to the boat. The remora certainly does 
attach itself to surfaces using a flat disc on its head which 
has cartilage blades which act as a sucker. By creating a 
vacuum between these blades, or by hooking the spines 
which cover the rear edge of the  blades, the fish attaches 
itself to rocks, boats or to other creatures. Quite 
understandably, all the authors insist on the fish’s ability 
to attach itself. Yet the curious thing is that the sole ability 
to attach itself seems to be used to explain the sl owing 
down, or even the stopping of a ship. Pliny implicitly 
suggests there is an immediate effect on a storm when the 
fish attaches itself to a vessel (“It easily puts an end to 
force and tames the fury of the elements, effortlessly, 
merely by attaching itself” (18)). Is this merely a form of 
poetic hyperbole, which takes pleasure in developing an 
adunaton? Isidore repeats Pliny, almost word for word: 
“The ship seems to behave as if it were anchored to the sea 
and remains motionless, not because the fish i s holding it 
back but because it has attached itself to the ship” (19). 
This implies that the fish does not hold the ship back as 
such, but rather its astonishing action is revealed only by 
its attaching itself. The key term which is repeated in 
almost all  of the texts is adhaerere. An accurate 
interpretation is essential here because this is where we 
may understand what the authors intend by the term 
“adhere”: of course this means first and foremost that the 
fish is attached and cannot be detached; yet thi s single 
element appears to explain the cause and effect 
relationship between the fish attaching itself to the surface 
and the resulting immobilization of the object, without 
raising any further questions.  
According to L. C. Watson (20), adhaerere corresponds to 
the Greek verb kollô “to stick”, common in Greek magical 
papyrus which describe love charm rituals. This “sticking” 
creates a physical “link”, the equivalent of katadesmos of 
love charms. Indeed, the terms used by several authors 
(regarding the con straint, the obedience, the preventing 
and the link with the boat) suggest a magical connection 
(cf. Oppian (Hal. 1, 232-3 ouk etelousa, pepedètai; 235-6 
desma; 242 -3 pedèn ); Aelian (N.A., 2, 17 pedèsas); 
Nonnos (Dion. 21, 45 -8 katasketon desmo  et 36, 367 -9 
===PAGE 19===
desmo; Pliny H.N. 32, 2 -6, tenere uincta). If our analysis 
is accurate then this signifies that it was believed that a 
boat could be immobilised in the same way that a man 
could be linked to a woman in an erotic context. 
Cassiodorus, who does not believe  in the fish’s power 
whatsoever, uses the verb adligare (21) to describe the 
way in which the echeneis bites the sides of the ship; yet 
this is the verb which is used four times by Pliny in the 
form of the participle adalligatus, (22) to designate the 
wearing of an object in the shape of an amulet in a magical 
context. He also says that the boat seems to be stuck 
(infixum(23)) to the surface of the sea.  
These examples show that a specific vocabulary with a 
high degree of magical connotation was projected onto 
the fish, probably derived from the Greek beliefs in magic 
which are attested to by Aristotle — but this does not 
necessarily imply that the authors who use such terms 
actually believe in any magical power. This point 
therefore needs to be examined mor e closely. The notion 
of a magic link does at any rate explain what Pliny 
presents as an incongruous detail: when an echeneis was 
found under Caligula’s ship, there was general surprise at 
the fact that the fish no longer had any effect when it was 
taken o n board, as if any slowing down effect due to 
mechanical force or traction was out of the question. (24) 
 
9.2 (b) One of the wonders of nature.  
When Pliny mentions the astonishing characteristics of a 
fish able to hold back a vessel, he sees this above all as an 
irrefutable indication of the mysterious power of nature. 
The action of a small fish which is able to resist the fury 
of the elements leads to a consideration of the theme of 
nature triumphing against itself after a struggle between 
antagonistic forces. As  we have seen above, he provides 
no explanation for this power, merely presenting it as a 
fact of nature, proven by observation which is sufficient to 
validate that fact. Two historical anecdotes are used to 
support this assertion: first of all, the Battle of Actium, and 
secondly the immobilization of Caligula’s ship during a 
voyage he undertook between two Latium coastal towns. 
Pliny provides no further analysis on how the fish 
functions and concludes his description with a general 
formula, widening his demonstration to include a broader 
group than the echeneis species: “there is no doubt in our 
minds that these animals [in other words all the 
astonishing creatures produced by nature] have identical 
powers”. To illustrate this power, he quotes a remarkable 
precedent to be found in the similar action of sea shells 
which stopped a Greek expedition during the time of 
Periande: these were marine gastropod molluscs called 
Venus shells which have a porcelain-like inner layer.  
 This belief in the power of nature f ollows a line from 
the paradoxography works which flourished in Greece 
from the Hellenistic period onwards. The authors of these 
works applied themselves to compiling natural wonders, 
attempting to astonish or amuse their readers, through 
exotic or sensati onal descriptions. Viewed from this 
perspective the prowess of the echeneis is no more 
extraordinary than that of the phoenix, the unicorn or the 
basilisk, and it is not unusual to read surprising stories 
such as that of the literate pachyderms who can read Greek 
(25) or that of the pilfering octopuses which climb trees to 
steal fruit (26). Such anecdotes correspond to the taste of 
their readers who were keen on such curiosities, as is 
revealed by the development of the notion of prodigious 
feats to be described below.  
  
9.2 (c) Rational interpretations.  
It might be expected that the appeal to common sense 
might prevail, or at least be well represented, but this is 
not the case. Rational interpretations are in the minority. 
In Table Talk, (27) Plutarch explains that boats slow down 
because of the algae which build up on the hull and the 
rudder, especially when the boat has been at anchor for a 
long period of time. The keel then becomes gorged with 
water and therefore accumulates a large amount of algae, 
the wood be coming covered with moss and losing its 
power of penetration in the water, while the waves which 
strike this sticky mass do not bounce off it effectively. 
Plutarch, who was aware of the phenomenon of 
magnetics, clearly excludes the latter explanation, whic h 
is put forward by one of his guests in an attempt to call on 
common sense and deconstruct the legend by reversing the 
relationship of cause and effect: he suggests that it is the 
presence of algae which attracts the fish and not the fish 
attached to the boat which slow it down. The idea of a 
whole shoal of fish having an influence on the advance of 
a ship might seem slightly plausible but this hypothesis is 
never suggested by the Ancient texts, contrary to the 
Renaissance emblems in which clouds of sucker  fish 
appear attached to the keels of boats. Five centuries after 
Plutarch, one of Cassiodorus’s letters suggests human 
causes: the late arrival of boats loaded with important 
wheat cargoes was not due to the fantastical effect of an 
echeneis but rather to  the negligence of sailors who may 
have fallen asleep, or who simply did not care. The 
humour and cultured elegance of the statesman is 
combined with moral judgement: “the echeneis which 
slows them down is their own venality, the conch stings, 
it is their own unlimited passions”. (28) 
 
9.2 (d) A divine warning.  
Pliny claims the echeneis is: “a fish which is worthy of 
counting among the omens”, (29)  thus superimposing the 
religious prism over a phenomenon which thus acquires a 
new dimension. Roman religion cannot b e invoked 
without mentioning the importance of monstra, the 
spectacular signs which it was believed were sent by the 
Gods in order to warn mankind that there was a message 
for them. The monstrum designated both the phenomenon 
of the apparition which reveal ed divine will and, at the 
same time, the exceptional creatures which transmitted 
this sign. In our case this is a strange fish endowed with 
supernatural powers. The echeneis does indeed belong to 
the family of “monsters”, and, to be more precise, it is a 
prodigious animal: it is thus to be distinguished from the 
monstrous teratological creature such as the four -legged 
snake; it is also to be distinguished from what we could 
term “prodigial” animals, that is to say ordinary animals 
which suddenly behave in a strange way thus announcing 
===PAGE 20===
a divine message, such as a bird stealing embers from a 
bonfire. The prodigious characteristic of the echeneis is its 
species’ singular and intrinsic ability to hold back boats, 
as is repeated in Ancient etymologies. Another s urprising 
aspect of this fish may be added: in the impressive list of 
prodigious animals drawn up by Julius Obsequens only 
two involve fish. The act of one single fish such as the 
echeneis is thus exceptional.  
Pliny considers the echeneis to be a bad omen  because it 
announced Caligula’s death. Pliny’s testimony reveals the 
transformation of the echeneis as a Roman prodigy during 
the Roman Empire: firstly, the prodigy, which was 
initially a sign of divine intervention in human affairs, had 
evolved to become  much more an omen, of a divine 
nature. Secondly, the prodigious fish became more 
specific, no longer necessarily referring to a group but 
rather to the specific destiny of one individual. The 
anecdote of the role of the echeneis at Actium thus takes 
its place in a series of omens which announce the defeat 
of Mark Antony, revealing to the eyes of the world that 
nature and the Gods had chosen that day to side with the 
Octavians. A linguistic detail may corroborate this 
reading: the Latin term mora, and its s ynonym remora, 
which came to replace the former, present assonance with 
an Ancient term connected with omens, remur, which 
designated a bird of ill omen. It is therefore possible that 
the remora may have sounded as if it carried negative 
connotations.  
In late Antiquity, Oppian (30) also describes the fish as 
prodigious, but in a figurative sense, implying that it was 
among the prodigious visions produced by dreams, with a 
corresponding loss of its divine quality. Yet Isidore of 
Seville and Ambrose reintrod uce the religious 
interpretation by detecting a reflection of the Creator’s 
omnipotence in the extraordinary power of the creature. 
“Do you think that so much power has been given to it 
without a gift from the Creator?”, (31) writes Ambrose, 
who uses the e xample to demonstrate that a fish such as 
the echeneis is used to remind mankind of its limits and of 
its condition, by placing it in a situation in which it can 
only expect help and safety from the Lord when faced with 
the perils of life.  
 
9.2 (e) Political exploitation.  
As has just been suggested, the appearance of signs 
and their interpretation is always of interest for political 
leaders. One of our hypotheses is the following: the victors 
of war, Octavian and his followers, may have spread the 
rumour of the intervention of the echeneis for propaganda 
purposes, in order to prove that the Gods had decided to 
side with them. Such political exploitation of religious 
beliefs was not new. The great political events of the end 
of the Republic were accompanied by prod igious events 
which poets and historians had busily chronicled: rains of 
blood, rivers reversing their flow, statues of the Gods 
covered in sweat, a mother giving birth to a snake... 
During the transition between the Republic and the 
Empire, towards the en d of the 1 st century B.C., the 
historiographical tradition reports a number of omens 
regarding Octavian -Augustus and the imperial family, 
destined to an exceptional fate: Octavian was born of the 
union between Atia and Apollo -snake; (32) an eagle is 
said t o have stolen a piece of bread from him and then 
returned it to him, a sign of his future sovereignty; (33) 
Livia is said to have warmed an egg in her hands hatching 
a chick with a huge crest, thus announcing prosperous 
offspring and the gaining of power a s represented by the 
crown symbolism of the crest.  
During the period immediately preceding the Battle of 
Actium, a long series of prodigies were reported, often 
involving animals. To take the example of one single 
historian, Dion Cassius describes how, in  36 B.C., a fish 
jumped from the sea to the feet of Sextus Pompeius, and 
the diviners told him that he would be master of the seas; 
(34) in 32 B.C., (35) a monkey interrupted a ceremony in 
the Temple of Ceres, a victory statue fell on the stage of a 
theatre, Etna erupted, a two -headed snake appeared in 
Etruria eventually to be struck by lightning, a statue of 
Mark Antony wept floods of tears, a wolf entered the 
Temple of Fortune, a dog was devoured by another dog 
during a horse race in the circus; in 31 B.C ., just  before 
Actium, Cleopatra fretted about swallows nesting on her 
admiral’s ship, lightning knocked down the statues of 
Mark Antony and Cleopatra erected by the Athenians; 
(36) and then it rained blood, weapons appeared in the sky, 
drums and flutes w ere heard, a giant snake appeared, the 
statue of Apis began lowing and comets were seen….(37) 
In this context the attributing of the incomprehensible 
immobilisation of Mark Antony’s vessel to the action of 
an echeneis and the view that this implied that th e Gods 
had intervened in human affairs thus constituted a 
perfectly plausible hypothesis. The legend may have 
begun just after Actium, during the ten -ship dedication 
ceremony which was offered by the victors just after the 
battle. Only the Octavians could have participated in 
hauling the ship out of the water. The legend may have 
originated “from the fact that when the ship of the defeated 
admiral was hauled on land to be exhibited as a trophy, a 
remora type fish was discovered on the hull”. (38) Mark 
Antony’s boat had spent time in the waters of the Bay of 
Preveza and Vonitza and the hull was probably laden 
down by parasitic plants and animals, and it is plausible to 
suggest that this may have attracted fish. The witnesses to 
the ceremony probably associate d the immobilisation of 
the boat to the presence of one or more fish parasites, due 
to the widespread belief in the Mediterranean of the 
immobilising power of certain sea shells or fish. (39). 
These beliefs may have been seized upon by the Octavians 
to crown their victory with divine support. (40) 
This anecdote is also present in Octavian’s Neptune like 
propaganda after Actium: he claimed to have been given 
mastery over the seas and that this was proof of his divine 
election. Used for ideological purposes, the legend of the 
remora suggested through its imagery that the powerful 
Mark Antony, his vessels like monstrous centaurs, could 
do nothing against the will of the Gods, who could 
brandish a tiny fish to put a permanent end to his advance. 
Conversely, a de scription by Propertius represents 
Octavian as the worthy protégé of Apollo, (41) who 
appeared over the stern of his boat surrounded by a triple 
===PAGE 21===
flame. A gloss by Servius (43) commenting on one of 
Virgil’s lines suggests that the exegetes of late Antiquity  
thought that the fish had been sent by Neptune to hold 
back Mark Antony.  
After a long period during which the echeneis was purely 
considered from ichthyological perspectives, critical 
discourse on the fish is today mostly the fruit of research 
by researchers in the arts and humanities. The story of the 
prodigious little fish and the commentaries which it gave 
rise to has led to four main approaches: linguistics, 
mythology (more specifically the mystification of 
history), the transmission of texts and the influence of the 
legend in European literature.  
As regards the linguistic approach, the Ancient authors 
named the fish after the legend it is associated with, 
considering from the start that the name derived from the 
creature’s powers. Contemporary linguists partly confirm 
this interpretation. They analyse the noun as a zoonym 
made up of two juxtaposed radicals, a verb (echein to hold, 
to hold on to) and a noun ( naus the ship), associated in a 
noun which does not reveal the syntactic relationship 
which unites the two radicals, as is usual in this type of 
compound. If we look for the implicit sentence which 
would provide the semantic base for the creation of this 
noun there are two possibilities due to the fact that the verb 
may function either transitively or intransitively: “he holds 
on to the boat” or “he holds back the boat”. This is where 
the ancient etymology (the fish was given this name 
because it holds back the boat) differs from contemporary 
linguistic reinterpretation (the compound may also signify 
that fish holds on to the boat). The modern day 
supposition is that the animal “which attaches itself to 
hulls” (an intransitive construction which probably 
initially led to the term in Greece) was later perceived, 
at a time and period still to be determi ned, as the 
animal “which holds back boats” (transitive 
construction). The legend may therefore originate in an 
etymological shift.  
A second direction concerns the spread of the legend and 
its relations with the field of myth. As Pastoureau has 
written, the collective imagination of a period allows us to 
understand that period as surely as the events which took 
place and the prevalent living conditions: “The historian 
must never excessively oppose imagination and reality. 
For the historian, as for the ethnologist, the anthropologist 
or the sociologist, imagination is always part of reality.” 
(43) To take into account this imagination involves close 
study of a specific cultural context and reasoning within 
the Ancients’ representation of the world. A reconstitution 
of the legend therefore involves the job of discriminating 
between what has been observed, believed, thought and 
imagined. Knowledge 2,000 years ago was considerably 
different from ours today, even in the field of an 
apparently accessible field suc h as zoology: people were 
able to believe in a fish with supernatural powers in the 
same way that they believed in the existence of 
fantastic creatures such as the griffin, the phoenix, the 
unicorn, the manticore and the amphisbaena , or more 
extraordinary still, in the metamorphosis of storks into 
women in the Oceanid islands. (44) The frontier between 
fable and reality was thus a moveable feast. Aristotle 
confirms the existence of a lemnian billy goat with two 
udders near its penis which were milked to mak e cheese. 
The same is true of monsters, the cynocephalus, 
hermaphrodite foal and the hippocentaur. The echeneis 
also needs to be considered alongside imaginary marine 
creatures, mermaids, tritons, Nereids, Charybdis, 
Scylla, whales, swordfish and all the d angers that are 
supposed to inhabit the troubled depths of the subaquatic 
world. It must lastly be viewed in relation to a whole 
bestiary connected with the exercise of power  
(Augustus’ parrot, the salt fish caught by Mark Antony, 
Cleopatra’s viper and dis solved pearls), their fantastic 
nature being heightened by the fantastic habits believed to 
be widespread in a mythic and sulphurous East.  
If the legend was handed down through the centuries from 
Classical Antiquity until the Renaissance, it is without 
doubt due to a process which needs to be fully explored: 
that process is based on a respect for tradition, which 
upholds the supremacy of text . Trust in the authority of 
a source sometimes annihilated all critical thinking. Over 
a long period “any fact which was claimed in writing, was, 
three-quarters of the time, accepted as fact.” (45) This 
form of unquestioning transmission is demonstrated by the 
filiation which may be observed between Aristotle, Pliny 
who translates the former, Cassiodorus and Isidore of 
Seville who quote the Latin encyclopaedist almost word 
for word, and the French texts of the 16 th century which 
translated them in turn. From this perspective, the texts are 
not only to be viewed as proof of what was said and 
thought, but also as having ge nerated discourse and 
reactions to such discourse. When the text becomes a 
reality in itself, the story of a text sometimes ends up 
replacing reality.  
Lastly, the circumstances surrounding the spread of the 
remora legend in European literature  need to be 
retraced, as well as the place of the legend in medieval 
bestiaries, alchemy, the marked upturn in interest for fish 
in the 16th century, probably due to two historic events: the 
Battle of Preveza and the crossing of the Cardinal of 
Tournon (Francisco Mass ari, Edward Wotton, Rabelais, 
Conrad Gesner, Jérôme Cardan, Rondelet, Alciat, 
Ambroise Paré and Montaigne), the wind of questioning 
in the 17 th century (Kircher, Aldrovandi, Gaspar Schott, 
Mersènne le Père, François Bernier and Du Tertre), the 
refuting of its power during the Enlightenment (Diderot, 
J. Valmont Bomar, C. Favart d’Herbigny and Linnaeus), 
its metaphoric use during the 19 th century (Michelet and 
Balzac), and its legacy in the 20 th century (Rezvani and 
Borgès).  
  
1. Histoire naturelle des poissons , t. 5, Ladrange 
and Verdière, 1831, p. 192.  
2. Apologie pour l’histoire, A. Colin, 1964, 5th 
edition, p. 65.  
3. Ar., History of Animals, 2, 14 ; Ov., Halieutica, 
99 ; El., On the Characteristics of Animals, 1, 36 
; 2, 17 ; Op., Halieutica 1, 212 et seq.  
4. Luc., Pharsalia, 6, 675.  
5. Pl., Natural History, 9, 41 and 32, 1.  
===PAGE 22===
6. Plut., Moralia, 2, 7.  
7. Cass., Variae, 1, 35.  
8. Don., on Ter, Andria, 739 ; St Ambr., 
Hexameron, 5, 10, 93 ; Serv., on Aen. 8, 699 ; 
Isid., Origines, 12, 6, 34.  
9. Esch., Agamemnon, 149 ; Non., Dion ysiaca, 13, 
114 ; Anthologie Palatine, 6, 27, 5.  
10. Cf. above.  
11. History of Animals, 2, 14.  
12. Pharsalia, 6, 675.  
13. Natural History, 9, 41.  
14. Cyranides, 1, 12.  
15. Ap., Apologia, 29-41.  
16. Natural History, 32, 50.  
17. Natural History, 32, 4, 41.  
18. Natural History, 32, 1 , 2 : non retinendo aut 
alio modo quam adhaerendo.  
19. Origines, 12, 6, 34 : non retinendo sed 
tantummodo adhaerendo.  
20. The echeneis and erotic magic, Classical 
Quaterly 60 (02), p. 639-646.  
21. Variae, 1, 35, 3.  
22. Natural History, 13, 50.  
23. Cass., Var., 1, 35, 3.  
24. Natural History, 32, I, 5.  
25. Pline, Natural History, 8, 6.  
26. Elien, On the Characteristics of Animals, 9, 45.  
27. Moralia, 2, 7.  
28. Variae, 1, 35, 4.  
29. Natural History, 32, I, 4.  
30. Halieutica, 1, 236.  
31. Hexameron, 5, 10, 93.  
32. Dion Cass., Roman History, 45, 1, 2 ; Suet., Life 
of Augustus, 94, 4.  
33. Suet., Life of Augustus, 94, 11.  
34. Roman History, 49, 5.  
35. 50, 8.  
36. 50, 15.  
37. 51, 17.  
38. S. Barbara, Zoologie et  paradoxographie en 
marge du bellum Actiacum, Schedae, 2009, p. 
14., quoting the analysis of W.W. Tarn, The 
battle of Actium, JRS, 21, 2, 1931, p. 186.  
39. Cf. the anecdote related by Pliny regarding the 
expedition of Periander’s ship which was 
stopped by shells, an event which is 
commemorated in the Temple of Venus in 
Knidos (Natural History, 9, 25, 41).  
40. This hypothesis, wh ich suggests that the legend 
was invented by the victors, is more plausible 
than the others, notably the hypothesis which 
suggests that the rumour was begun by the losers 
in order to reduce the shame of defeat, or by 
Cleopatra in order to castigate the Ale xandrians. 
Pliny’s interpretation would appear to confirm 
the first hypothesis: the immobilisation of Mark 
Antony’s fleet by the remora in order to highlight 
Octavian’s naval strength. He believes the 
amazing small fish prevented Mark Antony from 
launching his attack.  
41. 4, 6, 47-50 and 27-54.  
42. Ad Aen. 8, 699.  
43. Les animaux célèbres, Paris, Bonneton, 2001, p. 
9 : “L’historien ne doit jamais opposer trop 
fortement l’imaginaire et la réalité. Pour lui 
comme du reste pour l’ethnologue, 
l’anthropologue ou le socio logue, l’imaginaire 
fait toujours partie de la réalité.”  
44.  This is described in the works of Aelian.  
45. M. Bloch, op. cit., p. 65.  
 
9.3 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON 
NAVAL ARCHETECTURAL  
 
From historical reports (Pliny the Elder, 1857; Martin, 
1995), Octave presented a fleet composed of oared galley 
(classes from 2 to 6, namely bireme to sexteres). The class 
refers roughly speaking to the number of rowers per bench 
(see SI on Mathematics). Unlike Octavian fleet was light, 
Antonian fleet was heavy with classes f rom 4 to 10 (class 
10 is so -called decareme). As discussed in the 
supplementary information on Ancient History, the flag -
ship of Antony, a decareme, was delayed for several hours 
whereas the Octavian ships moved freely. Moreover, the 
contemporary reconstru ction of an ancient fifth century 
BC Athenian trieres by John Coates, John Morrison and 
Boris Rankov (Morrison, 1996; Morrison et al., 2000; 
Rankov, 2012) during the 80's and its tests thanks to sea 
trials since then allowed us to have access to the naval 
architecture plans of an ancient galley, with the help of the 
Trireme Trust. In addition, we benefited from the work of 
William Murray and the Institute for the Visualization of 
History who provided us with the 3D digitization of a ram, 
an ancient weapon t hat equipped the bow of ancient 
galleys (Murray, 2012). We used the so -called Athlit ram 
for our reduced model. 
Concomitantly to the end of the Hellenistic era, the 
construction of such big boats was stopped, what Murray 
calls “the big ship phenomenon”. Th e most delicate point 
of our study is the following assumption: we chose to 
consider that the dimensions of a decareme were twice 
those of a trireme, a strong hypothesis that we will try to 
justify. Firstly, the ancient reports insist on the gigantism 
of t he biggest boats at Actium: Florus speaks of the 
Antonian ships “being mounted with towers and high 
decks, they moved along like castles and cities, while the 
sea groaned and the winds were fatigued. Yet their 
magnitude was their destruction”. Historians w ould 
certainly argue about this point but in absence of direct 
evidence, we can only make hypotheses (Pitassi, 2011 for 
a sizes comparison between a 2, 3, 4 and 5 classes). 
Secondly, thanks to the archaeological studies of William 
Murray we have indirect e vidence of the massiveness of 
the warships at Actium. Indeed, his team was able to 
identify the size of the biggest boats thanks to the study of 
the prints of rams in the sockets of the Apollo temple in 
Nicopolis. Just after the battle, Octavian dedicated to 
Apollo a trophy with all the sizes of rams taken on the 
Antonian boats, from class 1 to class 10. By multiplying 
the dimensions of a trireme by a factor of two in order to 
===PAGE 23===
get a decareme, the obtained draft and beam seem to be 
compatible with the extrap olations of the historians. 
Legitimate doubts could be formulated with respect to the 
length since a boat of seventy meters long would maybe 
imply technological constraints with respect to its 
building, stability and resistance to flexion. Hence, by 
doing so, we compensate somehow with the fact that we 
kept the same block coefficient (the ratio of the box 
volume occupied by the ship, here 0.37) for the trireme 
and the decareme. However, as we will see, the important 
parameter in the context of the naval bat tle of Actium is 
not the length of the boat but the respective ships draft (1m 
for a trireme and 2m for a decareme, see below) versus the 
water depth: it is very probable that we underestimated the 
draft of the decareme since 2 m could be increased easily 
up to 3 m because of the weight of the boats as constantly 
described by the ancient sources. Finally, we noticed that 
gigantic boats built for the naumachiae of Caligula in the 
first century were as long as 74 meters, the so-called Nemi 
boat (Carlson, 2002) despite the fact that they sailed on a 
calm lake and not in the Mediterranean Sea. 
With interpolation, from historical data on the number of 
rowers per class galley (Pitassi, 2011, 2012; D’Amato, 
2015), we can assume the number of rowers of a decareme 
(Figure SI1). We find a ratio of 605/170=3.55 rowers 
between a decareme and a trireme, this is consistent with 
the resistance ratio. 
 
 
Figure SI1. Linear interpolation of number of rowers 
per class of galley. 
 
 
9.4 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON 
OCEANOGRAPHY  
 
The Ambracian Gulf is a semi enclosed coastal system in 
Western Greece, with a mean depth of 26 m and a 
maximum depth of 63 m. The gulf is connected with the 
adjacent open Ionian Sea through an elongated and narrow 
channel, i.e. the Preveza - Actium Straits.  Channel’s 
length is about 6km while its width ranges from 0.8 to 2 
km. Its eastern part, in the gulf’s interior, is about 20m 
deep and 2.5 km wide, while the channel narrows 
gradually to the west, with its range reaching 0.8 km in the 
in the middle. At th is extended shallow area, at the 
entrance of the Ambracian Gulf, the mean depth of which 
does not exceed 5 m, the battle of Actium took place. 
Nowadays, in the Ambracian Gulf’s sill a navigational 
channel, of about 13.5 m deep, has been constructed (see 
Figures SI2 and SI3). 
In the maps of Figures 1 and SI3, the reconstruction of the 
Ambracian Gulf’s sill bathymetry, during the period of the 
Actium naval battle is presented. The main differences 
between the current and the ancient bathymetry of the area 
are: a) the artificial channel, which was drained in the 
1970’s, and b) the mean sea level, which was 75 cm, lower 
than today. The region where the battle took place, i.e. the 
gulf’s entrance, was very shallow, characterized by a 
mean depth of about 2.5 m. The depths were progressively 
increased in both directions, toward the Ionian Sea and the 
gulf’s interior.  
A fjord -like water circulation, due to its oceanographic 
conditions and its morphology (Ferentinos et al., 2010; 
Kountoura and Zacharias, 2014), chara cterizes the 
Ambracian Gulf. Two large rivers, i.e Arachthos and 
Louros discharge large quantities of freshwater into the 
Ambracian Gulf (Therianos, 1974), resulting to the 
ecosystem’s permanent water column stratification and to 
the reduced salinity of th e surface layer. This water layer 
is usually well mixed, and its thickness is typically of the 
order of a few meters. The pycnocline layer’s 
characteristics (intensity and extent) are spatiotemporally 
varied, under the influence of seasonal meteorological and 
hydrological changes in the area. Surface and intermediate 
(pycnocline layer) waters are freely connected with the 
open sea through the gulf’s mouth. Denser water masses 
are trapped behind the sill, at the greater depths. Like in 
most fjord type basins , so in the Ambracian Gulf density 
variations of the open sea water are crucial for the water 
exchange, both above and below the sill level 
(Stigebrandt, 2001). At the entrance to the Ambracian 
Gulf semi-diurnal tide is prevailed with average range of 
5cm and a maximum recorded range of 25 cm 3, while at 
the gulf’s interior, the limited fetch of about 35 km3 results 
to a low energy wave regime. 
This study is focused on the gulf’s sill area, which is of 
interest because of the interaction between the gulf’s 
surface brackish water mass and the Ionian Sea’s salty 
waters. This interaction, results to the development of a 
front, due to the presence of a horizontal salinity and 
density gradient, which extends from the sill’s surface to 
its bottom. The area’s water column behaves like a single 
layer, while its speed and direction are varied under the 
influence of wind and tidal phase. Hydrodynamic 
circulation regime, changes at the deeper parts of the 
region, where brackish water outflows at the surface and 
saline water inflows near the seabed, attaining speeds of 
up to 60 and 80 cm/s according to (Ferentinos et al., 2010). 
Summarizing, the area of the Ambracian Gulf sill is 
characterized of great oceanographic interest and many 
peculiarities, due to its morphology, i ts location and the 
interaction of currents, tides and wind. 
The objective of the present study is to give a scientific 
explanation about the Antony’s defeat in the Actium naval 
battle. As the truth is possibly connected with the area’s 
oceanography, it is  crucial to answer some questions 
about: 1) The circulation pattern in the study area today, 
2) spatial distribution of the pycnocline in the study area 

===PAGE 24===
today, 3) The importance of morphology, tide and wind on 
the area’s circulation pattern today and 4) Τh e circulation 
and stratification pattern of the study area during the battle 
and their influence to the battle’s outcome.  
The current hydrodynamic conditions in the area of 
interest will help us to reproduce the prevailed water 
circulation during the batt le. For this purpose, decisive 
factors will be the data and information that can be 
retrieved from the battle description in historical texts. 
Furthermore, a study of the area’s: a) water column 
physicochemical characteristics, b) currents, c) tidal 
characteristics and d) meteorological parameters is 
essential. 
 
Figure SI 2. Current morphological features of the 
Ambracian Gulf sill area. 3D block diagram.  
  
 
Figure SI 3. The current bathymetric map of the 
Ambracian Gulf entrance.  
  
Figure SI4. Morphological features of the Ambracian 
Gulf sill area 2000BP. 3D block diagram.  
 
 
9.5 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON 
MATHEMATICS  
 
The evaluations of the wave -making resistance for the 
maps is based on an analytical formula called the 
Sretensky formula (8). This formula  is obtained by 
assuming the ship to be slender, and therefore the wave 
phenomena to be linear. Many experimental studies (see 
for instance (2)) have shown a good agreement between 
the results given by this formula and the data from 
experiments. This formu la takes into account the water 
depth h, the velocity of the ship V, and the shape of the 
ship, given as an offset function f that defines the half -
width of the ship for each point of the center -plane (x,z). 
The direction of motion of the ship is x, and the depth is z. 
The wave resistance according to Sretensky’s formula 
hence reads: 
 
𝑅𝑊(𝑈) = 8𝜋𝜌𝑔
𝑉2 ∫ 𝐼2(𝛾) + 𝐽2(𝛾)
(𝛾2 − 𝑔𝛾
𝑉2 tanh(𝛾ℎ))
1
2
𝛾𝑑𝛾  
∞
𝛾0
 
Where 𝒈 = 9.81m.𝑠−2 and the coefficients  𝑰 and 𝑱 are 
given by 
𝐼(𝛾) = 𝜆(𝛾) 𝑈
2𝜋 ∫ 𝜕𝑓
𝜕𝑥 (𝑥, 𝑧) cosh(𝛾(ℎ − 𝑧))
cosh(𝛾ℎ) sin(𝜆(𝛾)𝑥)
Ω
dzdx 
𝐽(𝛾) = 𝜆(𝛾) 𝑈
2𝜋 ∫ 𝜕𝑓
𝜕𝑥 (𝑥, 𝑧) cosh(𝛾(ℎ − 𝑧))
cosh(𝛾ℎ) cos(𝜆(𝛾)𝑥)
Ω
dzdx 
In which Ω is the domain on which f is defined. The 
function λ is defined by 
𝜆(𝛾) = (𝑔𝛾
𝑉2 tanh(𝛾ℎ))
1
2
 
Finally, 𝜸𝟎 is computed as the positive solution of the 
nonlinear equation 
𝛾0 = 𝑔
𝑉2 tanh(𝛾0ℎ) 
whose origin is to be found in the dispersion relation for 
finite depth water waves (13, 14).  
 
9.5 (a) Integration of the naval architectural data 
 
The main advantage of using the aforementioned formula 
is the opportunity provided to take into account the actual 
data from naval architecture through the shape of the hull. 
Recall that the shape of the hull is given by the offset 
function f, in our case, an approximation of it on a mesh. 
The geometrical data we have on the trireme is not of this 

===PAGE 25===
form, so our goal will be to recover if though a technique 
called draping. The data we have is in the form of a set of 
parametric surfaces that can be exploited with the software 
Rhinoceros.  
The principle of the draping technique is to consider a set 
of points (red points, figure SI 5, left) placed initially on a 
plane parallel to the hull’s centerplane, and to project these 
points on the hull by considering only displacements in the 
y direction. The set of points we then obtain (red points, 
figure SI5, right) hence “drape” the object. A few points 
end up straight on the centerplane, their offset being zero, 
we trim them off the mesh to avoid unnecessary further 
calculations.  
The dr aping function is already implemented in 
Rhinoceros. Three grid of points were used here to 
represent with the same level of accuracy the hull, the nose 
and the ram (for which some details have the typical scale 
of 1cm for a 30m long ship). This results in a mesh file of 
413,568 points which is too large for fast and efficient 
calculations of the wave resistance as it is required here.  
We reduce the size of the mesh by extracting a subset of 
points with a variable density (typically we take more 
points wherever small details are involved). Then a new 
mesh is generated with Matlab’s build -in Delaunay mesh 
generator. The result of all these operations is a 
representation of the trireme’s hull through a P1 finite 
element function on a mesh of 25,185 points (se e figure 
SI6). 
This allows us to calculate the functions I(γ) and J(γ) 
using a finite element method associated to this P1 
representation.
 
 
Figure SI5. Schematic representation of the draping procedure.  
 
 
 
Figure SI 6. Representation of the surface of the 
function 𝒇 obtained through our 
reconstruction procedure.  
 
9.5 (b) Calculation of the wave resistance integral 
The first difficulty in computing the wave resistance 
integral (1) remains in the computation of the terms 𝑰 and 
𝑱, which are integrals with respect to space that depend on 
the shape of the hull defined b y 𝒇. Let us focus on the 
computation of 𝑰 (the computation of 𝑱 is performed in a 
similar manner). If we define 𝝋 as  
𝜑(𝛾, 𝑥, 𝑧) =
𝜕𝑓
𝜕𝑥 (𝑥, 𝑧)
cosh(𝛾(ℎ−𝑧))
cosh(𝛾ℎ) sin(𝜆(𝛾)𝑥)  
our goal is to integrate 𝝋 with respect to (𝒙, 𝒛) for all 
values of 𝜸. 
The computation of the integrals (1) - (3) is known to be 
delicate3. We detail the numerical method in two steps, 
first the integrals (2) and (3) with respect the space 
coordinates (𝒙, 𝒛), and then the integral (1) with respect to 
𝜸. The integrals (2) and (3) are computed using the 
aforementioned P1 representation f of the hull. This term 
is calculated in an exact manner on every triangle of the 
mesh by using a mapping on a reference triangle. Such an 
exact calculation is much prefera ble to the use of a 
quadrature formula.  
Once 𝑰(𝜸) and 𝑱(𝜸) are determined, we can compute the 
integral (1). Two difficulties lie ahead: the singularity at 
𝜸𝟎 and the infinite range of integration. The first problem 
is tackled using subintervals that become smaller and 
smaller as 𝜸 comes closer to the singularity. The integral 
at infinity is separated on subintervals that become larger 
and larger as 𝜸 grows. On each subinterval, we approach 
the integral with a two points Gauss integration method. 
Our resulting numerical wave resistance has b een 
validated by comparison with tabulated results obtained 
for Wigley hulls.  
 
9.5 (c)  INTEGRATION OF THE 
OCEANOGRAPHIC DATA  
  
From the methods described above, we are able to 
compute the wave making resistance for a given  𝑽, 𝒉 
and 𝒇. As described in methods section on Oceanography, 
the bathymetry is given as a 100x74 array that provides a 
water depth for each point of the Ambracian Gulf. Our aim 
here is to build an array that provides a wave resistance for 
each point of the Gulf, for a given velocity  𝑽 and hull 
shape 𝒇. The approach we use in order to reduce the 
computational costs is to compute wave resistance vs. 
depth profiles and to map these profiles into the 
oceanographic data by using interpolation. These profiles 

===PAGE 26===
will be computed with the method des cribed earlier by 
selecting a limited well-chosen set of depth values ranging 
from the ship's draught to a depth under which the 
behavior of the resistance can be considered constant 
(deep water behavior). The result is then interpolated with 
splines (Figures SI7 and SI8). 
 
 
Figure SI7. Plots of the wave resistance versus depth 
profiles. First column: trireme. Second 
column: decareme. Top row, 7 knots; 
bottom row: 10 knots. The blue points 
represent the computed value of the wave 
making resistance and the red line is the 
spline interpolation. The vertical green 
dashed line represents the critical depth 
corresponding to the critical Froude number 
𝑭𝒓𝒉 =
𝑽
√𝒈𝒉 = 𝟏 
 
Figure SI8. Plots of the wave resistance versus depth 
profiles for various target vel ocity from 7 
knots to 10 knots.  Each plot shows a 
comparison of the wave -making resistance 
for each ship involved (in red the trireme, in 
blue the decareme). Note that the wave -
making resistance for depths below the 
ship's draft (2 m) are not represented as they 
have no sense. (Gotman, 2002). 
water depth for each point of the Ambracian Gulf. Our 
aim here is to build an array that provides a wave 
resistance for each point of the Gulf, for a given 
velocity 𝑽 and hull shape 𝒇.   
The approach we use in order to reduce the computational 
costs is to compute wave resistance vs. depth profiles and 
to map these profiles into the oceanographic data by using 
interpolation. These profiles will be computed with the 
method described earlier by selecting a limited well -
chosen set of depth values ranging from the ship's draught 
to a depth under which the behavior of the resistance can 
be considered constant (deep water behavior). The result 
is then interpolated with splines (Figures SI7 and SI8).  
 
To the wave making resistance, we can add a viscous 
resistance related to the friction of the fluid on the hull. 
This viscous contribution can be calculated using the 
ITTC 57 procedure (ITTC, 1957; Molland et al., 2017): 
𝑅𝑣 = 𝐶𝑣
1
2 𝜌𝑆𝑉2 
With Cv the coefficient of friction: 
𝐶𝐹 = 0.075
(log10 𝑅𝑒 − 2)2 
Thus, we compute a total resistance, composed of a 
viscous resistance and a wave making resistance (Figure 
SI10). For small Froude numbers (equivale nt to deep 
water regime), the wave component becomes negligible 
compared to the viscous component. In this configuration, 
the ratio of total resistance is  
RtD/RtT ≈ 3.6 ≈ RvD/RvT (Figure SI11 and SI12) 
This value, close to 4, is explained by the geometry of the 
decareme which is twice as large as the trireme. Since the 
galleys have slender shapes, we can relate the ships’ 
geometry to a board of length L and height T. The w et 
surface S is roughly L × T × 2 (we multiply by two to take 
into account both sides  of the board). The length and the 
draft of the decareme are double that the length and the 
draft of the trireme. Thus, there is a factor 4 between the 
wet surface of decareme and the wet surface of trireme. To 
find the ratio 3.6, we have to start from the  ITTC57 
formula: 
𝑅𝑣𝐷 = 𝐶𝐹𝐷
1
2 𝜌𝑆𝐷𝑉2 and 𝑅𝑣𝑇 = 𝐶𝐹𝑇
1
2 𝜌𝑆𝑇𝑉2. 
𝑅𝑣𝐷
𝑅𝑣𝑇
= 𝐶𝐹𝐷
𝐶𝐹𝑇
𝑆𝐷
𝑆𝑇
 
𝐶𝐹𝐷
𝐶𝐹𝑇
=
(log10 𝑅𝑒𝑇  − 2)2
(log10 𝑅𝑒𝐷  − 2)2 =
(log10 𝑅𝑒𝑇  − 2)2
(log10 𝑅𝑒𝑇 + log102 − 2)2 
 
𝑅𝑒𝑇 ≈ 108 so 
𝐶𝑣𝐷
𝐶𝑣𝑇
≈  0.9 and  
𝑹𝒗𝑫
𝑹𝒗𝑻
≈ 𝟑. 𝟔 
Without very shallow effects, a decareme has a viscous 
resistance 3.6 times stronger than the resistance of a 
trireme. To compensate this phenomenon, it is necessary 
to deploy a greater rowing power.  
. 

===PAGE 27===
 
Figure SI9. Maps featuring the ancient bathymetry and theoretical predictions of wave making resistances for two 
different velocities: 7 knots (left) and 10.5 knot s (right, which is saturated). At 7 knots, the decareme’s 
wave resistance RD can be lower than the trireme’s wave resistance. 
 
 
Figure S I10. Plots of total resistances broken down into viscous resistance (blue) and wave making resistance 
(yellow), for trireme and decareme configurations. The viscous resistance is calculated with the method 
(ITTC, 1957), and the wave making resistance with the Sretensky’s formula.  
 
 
Figure SI 11. Ratio between total resistances of the 
decareme and of the trireme, with a fi xed 
velocity of 7.0 knots. The ratio of total 
resistances tends towards the ratio of 
viscosity resistances, equal to 3.6 for low 
Froude numbers (Fr h < 0.75 and h > 2.5 m). 
The peak of resistance is not undergone by 
the decareme since it is in a zone of too  
shallow depth (the decareme’s draft is bigger 
than the depth TD>h). 
 
Figure SI1 2. Ratio between total resistances of the 
decareme and of the trireme, with a fixed 
velocity of 10.5 knots. The ratio of total 
resistances tends towards the ratio of 
viscosity resistances, equal to 3.6 for low 
Froude numbers (Frh < 0.75 and h > 5 m).  
 
The use of the ITTC57 protocol is consistent with the 
experiments conducted. Indeed, if we compare this 
method to that used by (Coates, 1989) , based on the 
towing tank measuremen ts of (Grekoussis and Loukakis , 

===PAGE 28===
1986), we find similar results  (Figure SI13) . The 
computed viscous resistance with IITC57 is close to 
Coates’ viscous resistance, up to 8 knots (superior to the 
cruising speed of 7 knots), the speed for which the wave 
resistance starts to play a role in deep water. According to 
Coates’ curves (Figure SI13; Coates, 1989), from cruising 
speed (7-8 knots) the wave resistance starts to play a role. 
Thus, a greater effort must be made to increase the speed 
of the ship. Even in deep water, the wake clings to the ship 
as the echeneis -remora, and increases the difficulty in 
reaching the attack speed. Shallow water effects can 
totally prevent reaching this speed by a “wall of 
resistance” (Figure SI9). 
In the future we may have to switc h to a nonlinear 
Rankine-source panel method. 
 
 
Figure SI13. Comparisons between the experimental 
results of (Grekoussis and Loukakis , 1986), 
the IT TC57 calculation with Michell’s 
theory, and the results of (Coates, 1989). 
Michell’s theory is the limit of Sretensky’s 
formula for h infinite (Kirsh, 1966). 
 
 
9.6 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON 
FLUID MECHANICS 
9.6 (a) Experimental Materials and method of 
stereovision 
 
Figure SI14. Sketch of the experimental setup with the 
positions of the recording cameras.  The 
stereovision method is based on the 
deformations of a random dots pattern glued 
to the bottom. 
 
The experiments have been carried out in the towing tank 
of the Pprime Institute in Poitiers, France. Its geometry is 
a rectangular section with 1.5 m wide and a water level up 
to 1.2 m. The channel is 20 m long, and the measured zone, 
where we placed cameras, was at 10 m from the starting. 
The ship is towed by a trolley along the longitudinal axis 
x of the channel, with a speed up to 2.35 m/s. Thus, the 
maximum velocity of  the decareme is 33 knots, and the 
trireme’s maximum velocity is 23 knots, at real-scale. The 
acceleration had been fixed at 0.5 m/s², and a computer 
controlled the trolley’s velocity. The ship was fixed (no 
translation or rotation), in order to test the e ffect of the 
Antonian number An=T/h only. 
As the amplitudes of the waves produced by a hull with 
such a length are very small, the method to measure these 
waves needs to be very precise and with a high resolution 
since the often used methods such as intrus ive resistive 
probes cannot be applied. Such an optical method would 
have been difficult to apply with a bigger reduced model 
(such as the one of Grekoussis and Loukakis, 1985; 1986) 
since the extent of the visualizations windows would 
increase as well as the size of the data post -processing. 
Moreover, the limited resolution of the cameras would 
have been a restriction for such a large field of 
investigation. The wake-patterns have been measured with 
an original stereovision method, inspired from an earlier 
method developed in our team  (Chatellier et al., 2013; 
Gomit, 2013b; Caplier, 2015) and improved for our 
purpose (see below). Two SpeedSense 1040 cameras from 
Dantec Dynamics with 28mm focal lenses have been 
placed above the water surface with a relative angle 
(Figure SI14) to capture the deformations of the random 
dots pattern, a roughcast of 750mm x 200mm (half the 
width of the water channel). The first step of the 
measurement is to record the image of the pattern with free 
surface at rest (Figure SI15). Then, the boat is launched 
and the two cameras capture images of the pattern 
deformed by the free surface undulations caused by the 
passage of the ship, at a frequency of 10 frames per second 
(fps) during 20s. The second step is to calculate the 
displacement of the water level in pixels on each image of 
the cameras, and then to calculate the displacement in 
millimeter for each time step. At the end we can 
reconstruct the whole wake behind the ship. The 
synchronization of the cameras and the acquisition of the 
images are performed with the DynamicStudio software. 
Each trial is recorded 3 times and then the images are 
processed and data are correlated with a dedicated 
algorithm. T hen we can reconstruct the wake with a 
vertical precision of 0.1 mm on the water height and a 
horizontal spatial resolution of 10 mm (Figure SI1 7). The 
stereorefraction method has been validated with 
measurements of the wake produced by a 1.2 m long 
Wigley hull with rectangular geometry (the archetype of 
laboratory ships) for the deep -water configuration in the 
towing tank. The wake produced by this reference boat is 
the usual Kelvin wake in deep water (Figure SI1 6). 
Visualizations of the wake have been mad e from the top 
with a Jai CV -M2 camera with a 14mm focal lens at a 
frequency of 20fps. 

===PAGE 29===
  
Figure SI15. The steps of the stereorefraction method from the acquisition of the reference images to the 
reconstruction of the surface deformation. Each column corr esponds to one camera. a -b, Images of the 
reference pattern with the free surface at rest. c -d, Images of the pattern deformed by the free surface 
undulations. e-f, Free surface deformation in pixels (calculated with a correlation algorithm). g, the free 
surface deformation in millimeters (calculated with a reconstruction algorithm).  

===PAGE 30===
 
Figure SI16. The usual Kelvin deep water wake produced by a Wigley hull, measured with the stereorefraction 
method in the towing tank.  
 
 
Figure SI17. The peculiar echeneid ian wake behind the ship in the decareme configuration at Fr h=0.9, measured 
with the stereorefraction method in the towing tank. The boat has no angle with the horizontal.  
 
9.6 (b) Use of spectral domain 
 
Extended views of the wake allow spectral analysis of the 
wake, according to the method presented (Carusotto and 
Rousseaux, 2013), used in deep water by (Gomit, 2014), 
or in confined configuration (Caplier, 2015). By selecting 
the stern wake, in the real space (x, y), and with a Discrete 
Fourier Transform, we get a representation in the Fourier 
space (k x, k y). The spectral domain brings a lot of 
additional information to the visualizations: the energy 
distribution in the wake spread over different wave 
numbers, or the hydraulic response around the ship. 
Energy is distributed along the dispersion relation:  
0 = 𝑉𝑚
2𝑘𝑥
2 − (𝑔𝑘 + 𝜎
𝜌 𝑘3) tanh(𝑘ℎ) 
We can bring out several remarkable values: the cutoff 
wave number kc, the intersection between the dispersion 
relation and the abscissa axis; the inflect ion point kxinfl, 
where the slope is a measure of the angle of the 
wake: tan(𝛼) = (
𝑑𝑘𝑦
𝑑𝑘𝑥
|
𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑙
)
−1
. Wave numbers before and 
after the inflection point are respectively relative to the 
transverse and divergent waves.  The hydrodyna mic 
response, which depends on the speed and shape of the 
boat, feeds the lower part of the spectral domain with 
 𝑘𝑥 < 𝑘𝑐 (Carusotto and Rousseaux, 2013; Gomit, 2013a, 
2014) (Figure SI18).  
The Figure SI19 shows the selection of a part of the wake, 
its representation in the spectral domain, and the detection 
of the dispersion relation. After a detection of amplitude 
maximums, a polynomial interpolation is carried out on 
the experimental measurements, in order to measure a 
slope and the angle of wake . Bounded harmonics are 
observed at high speeds hence the appearance of 
additional branches at high wavenumbers with a 
corresponding non-linear deformation of the wake in the 
real space. 

===PAGE 31===
 
Figure SI18. Fourier space of a wake measured by stereo-refraction and effect of the filter: hydrodynamic response 
(𝒌𝒙 < 𝒌𝒄), wake (𝒌𝒙 > 𝒌𝒄). The keel of the boat makes an angle of 0.13 ° with the horizontal (stern sunk). 
 
 
Figure SI19. Processing of a top view of the echeneidian wake by Fast Fourier Transform at Frh=1.02. The FFT is 
done on the red box with a simple visualization by a top camera. 
9.6 (c)     

===PAGE 32===
9.6 (d) reduced model limits 
 
On a real scale, the capillary term k3 in the dispersion 
relation can be neglected, and the waves considered as 
purely gravity. Howeve r, by carrying out the reduced 
model experiments, this term can have an impact. Thus, 
by calculating theoretically the cut -off wavenumber  for 
the transverse waves with (kc) and without surface tension 
(kcσ), we may find a difference of up to more than 100% 
(Figure SI20). In the case of our experiments, the 
difference does not exceed 4%, for the lowest speeds 
tested in decareme configuration. Thus,  the scale of our 
model does not involve significant additio nal capillary 
effects 
𝑘𝑦 = 0 ⇒  𝑘 = 𝑘𝑥 = 𝑘𝑐 
0 = 𝑉𝑚
2𝑘𝑐
𝜎2 − (𝑔𝑘𝑐
𝜎 + 𝜎
𝜌 𝑘𝑐
𝜎3) tanh(𝑘𝑐
𝜎ℎ) 
0 = 𝑉𝑚
2𝑘𝑐
2 − 𝑔𝑘𝑐 tanh(𝑘𝑐ℎ) 
 
The reduced model tests are also limited by the velocity 
Vm = 23 cm/s (Rousseaux et al., 2010), below which the 
wake is killed by capillary effects (black area on the Figure 
SI20).  
The experiments are carried out in a towing tank, which 
generates additional confinements to the vertical 
confinement (An = T/h): a transve rse confinement ( B/W), 
and a “sectional confinement” ( m=Ab/Ac). The first leads 
to reflections of the wake on the walls of the canal 
(reflections creating interferences). The second generates 
a return current and causes a water level drawdown of the 
ship (Pompée, 2015). According to Schijf's theory, some 
of tested configurations are in transcritical regime. With 
side visualizations, we checked that the model did not lead 
to a significant w ater level drawdown of the ship. The 
transcritical effect becomes imp ortant only for excessive 
speeds (VR > 12 knots). 
Because we have chosen a geometric scaling and a Froude 
scaling, hence the Reynolds scaling cannot be respected. 
Thus, we have a factor between the real -scale Reynolds 
number, and the Reynolds number model: 
Re𝑚 = 𝑉𝑚𝐿𝑚
1
𝜈 = 𝑉𝑅
√𝜆
𝐿𝑅
𝜆
1
𝜈 = Re𝑅
𝜆3/2 
In decareme configuration, we have  Re𝑚 =
Re𝑅
392, and in 
trireme configuration, Re𝑚 =
Re𝑅
138. ReR is in the order of 
108, thus, Rem is in the order of 10 6, so we are still in a 
turbulent Reynolds number regime.  
As the Reynolds scaling is not respected, we have to 
calculate the viscosity in order to take into account the 
effect of scales. Doutreleau et al., (2011) give a calculation 
of the kinematic viscosity. For the model:  
𝜈 = ([0.585(𝑡𝑊 − 12)10−3 − 0.03761](𝑡𝑊 − 12)
+ 1.235)10−6 
For the real-scale:  
𝜈 = ([0.659(𝑡𝑊 − 1)10−3 − 0.05076](𝑡𝑊 − 12)
+ 1.7688)10−6 
With tW the water temperature ( tW was 15°C at Actium, 
and 21°C in our towing tank).  
Finally, since the c hannel has a finite length (20 m), and 
our measurement zone was 10m from the starting point, 
unsteady effects may occur. However, apart from the high 
speeds tested but unrealistic at full scale (exceeding 12 
knots), the wake appeared to have stabilized as the boat 
passed through the study area (see Robbins et al., 2011; 
Macfarlane and Graham-Parker, 2018). 
 
 
Figure SI20. Capillary effect as a function of the ratio T/h, and the Froude. In the black zone, the capillary effects 
suppress the wake. Green T and blue D are configurations made in the towing tank. Purple lines are the 
borders of the transcritical regime according to Schijf’s theory.
 
