
===== PAGE 1 =====

===== PAGE 2 =====
T rireme Olympias
The Final Report
===== PAGE 3 =====

===== PAGE 4 =====
T rireme Olympias
The Final Report
Sea T rials 1992–4
Conference Papers 1998
edited by
Boris Rankov
with contributions by
Ronald Bockius, René Burlet, John Coates, Edwin Gifford, John Howarh, Douglas Lindsay,  
Paul Lipke, Seán McGrail, Robin Oldfield, Anthony J. Papalas, Boris Rankov, Harry Rossiter,  
André W. Sleeswyk, Timothy Shaw, Andrew Taylor, Alec Tilley, Herman Wallinga,  
Ford Weiskittel, Brian Whipp, Ian Whitehead and Meph Wyeth
Oxbow Books 
Oxford and Oakville
===== PAGE 5 =====
Frontispiece: Plan, elevation and cross-sections of Olympias (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 6 =====
This book is dedicated to the memory of
John Francis Coates
(1922–2010)
and
John Sinclair Morrison
(1913–2000)
===== PAGE 7 =====
Published by
Oxbow Books, Oxford, UK
© Oxbow Books and the individual authors 2012
ISBN 978-1-84217-434-0
This book is available direct from
Oxbow Books, Oxford, UK
(Phone: 01865-241249; Fax: 01865-794449)
and
The David Brown Book Company
PO Box 511, Oakville, CT 06779, USA
(Phone: 860-945-9329; Fax: 860-945-9468)
or from our website
www.oxbowbooks.com
A CIP record is available for this book from the British Library
Front Cover: Olympias from above, passing through the Corinth Canal on 29th July, 1992 
(Photo: Rosie Randolph/T rireme T rust).
Printed in Great Britain by
Short Run Press, Exeter
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
T rireme Olympias : the final report : sea trials 1992-4, conference papers 1998 / edited by Boris Rankov ; with contributions 
by Ronald Bockius ... [et al.]. -- 1st ed.
       p. cm.
   Includes bibliographical references.
Summary: “This is the final publication of the Olympias project, which saw the building of a 170-oared Athenian trireme 
of the fourth century BC and its operation in five series of sea-trials. The first three sea-trials have already been published 
in separate volumes. The rest of the volume is devoted to papers presenting more recent research on the trireme”--Provided 
by publisher.
   ISBN 978-1-84217-434-0
   1. T riremes. 2. Olympias (Ship) 3. T riremes--Design and construction. 4. Ships, Ancient--Reconstruction. 5. Ship trials. 
I. Rankov, N. B., 1954- II. Bockius, Ronald. 
   VM16.T73 2012
   623.82’1--dc23
                                                         2011044248
===== PAGE 8 =====
Contents
List of Figures   ix
Acknowledgements   xi
Introduction and Summaries   1
Boris Rankov
Part 1. The 1992 and 1994 Sea T rials and Other Excursions 
The 1992 Sea Trials of Olympias
 1. Olympias 1992 T rials Report   12
  Paul Lipke with John Howarth, Ford Weiskittel and Meph Wyeth
 1.1.  Introduction: salvaging value from a failed effort to publish a 1992 Olympias sea trials report   12
 1.2.  Some results of Olympias’ 1992 trials and log summary   13
 1.3.  T raining, section leading and crew leadership in the 1990 and 1992 sea trials   16
 1.4.  Olympias 1992–3 repairs and modifications, with lessons for future reconstructions   21
 1.5.  Different perspectives on some reported results   32
 1.6.  Where the T rireme Project has gone wrong   36
 1.7.  Suggestions for future research in the T rireme Project   37
 1.8.  A final note: falling victim to our own success   39
The 1993 Visit to London
 2.  Olympias on the Thames, 1993   40
  Boris Rankov
The 1994 Sea Trials of Olympias
 3.  Report of the 1994 Sea T rials of the T rireme Olympias   43
  Timothy Shaw
 4.  The Slow T rireme Experience in Olympias in 1994   50
  Andrew T aylor
The 2004 Olympics at Athens
 5.  Olympias
 at the Olympics, 2004   58
  Boris Rankov
Part 2. Proposals for a Revised Design 
 6.  Preface to the Proposals for a Revised Design 
  62
  Timothy Shaw
 7.  From the Golden Horn to Heraclea: duration of the passage in calm weather   63
  Timothy Shaw
 8.  The Performance of Ancient T riremes in Wind and Waves   68
  Timothy Shaw
 9.  Towards a Revised Design of a Greek T rireme of the Fourth Century BC: 
  advantages of a long stroke   76
  Timothy Shaw
 10.  The Proposed Design of any Second Reconstruction   82
  John Coates
===== PAGE 9 =====
Contentsviii
Part 3. Critiques of Olympias: For and Against 
 11.  As Seen by a Passer-by   94
  René Burlet
 12.  Comments on Olympias   97
  Edwin Gifford
 13.  Comments on Olympias   100
  Seán McGrail
 14.  The Reconstructed T rireme Olympias and her Critics   101
  Anthony J. Papalas
 15.  Beyond Olympias: an outsider’s view   109
  André W. Sleeswyk
 16.  An Unauthentic Reconstruction   121
  Alec Tilley
Part 4. The Operation and Performance of Ancient T riremes 
Slipping and launching
 17.  On Slipping and Launching T riremes from the Peiraeus Shipsheds and from Beaches   134
  John Coates
Performance under sail
 18.  
Olympias Under Sail, and other Performance Matters: a practical seaman’s perspective   142
  Douglas Lindsay
Performance under oar
 19.  On the Speed of Ancient Oared Ships: the crossing of L. Aemilius Paullus from Brindisi 
  to Corfu in 168 BC 
  145
  Boris Rankov
 20.  Xenophon on the Speed of T riremes   152
  Herman Wallinga
 21.  Triereis under Oar and Sail   155
  Ian Whitehead
Performance under oar and the human engine
 22.  Human Mechanical Power Sustainable in Rowing a Ship for Long Periods of Time 
  161
  John Coates
 23.  Paleo-bioenergetics: clues to the maximum sustainable speed of a trireme under oar   165
  Harry Rossiter and Brian Whipp
Part 5. Aspects of T rireme Construction and Maintenance 
 24.  Uniformity or Multiplicity? On Vitruvius’ 
interscalmium   170
  Ronald Bockius
 25.  The Effect of Bilge Water on Displacement, Vertical Centre of Gravity and Metacentric Height 
  of Olympias in the T rial Condition   182
  John Coates
 26.  T rireme Life Span and Leakage: a wood technologist’s perspective   185
  Paul Lipke with John Coates
 27.  T riremes and Shipworm   203
  Paul Lipke
 28.  Cordone, Contracordone and Hypozomata   207
  André W. Sleeswyk
Part 6. Recent Research 
 29.  Collision Damage in T riremes   214
  Robin Oldfield
 30.  The Dimensions of the Ancient T rireme: a reconsideration of the evidence   225
  Boris Rankov
 31.  Battle Manoeuvres for Fast T riremes   231
  Andrew T aylor
===== PAGE 10 =====
List of Figures
Fig. IS.1. Olympias in her dry-dock and covered shed at 
the Hellenic Navy Museum, Neo Faliro (Photo: Boris 
Rankov/T rireme T rust).
Fig. 1.4.1. Side view of thranite seat and foot gear, showing 
joinery (Photo: Paul Lipke). 
Fig. 1.4.2. View of thranite seat and foot gear, looking toward 
the bow, showing fastenings into end grain and other 
details (Photo: Paul Lipke).
Fig. 1.4.3. Suggested stronger layout of stretcher rails and 
crossbar, viewed from above.
Fig. 1.4.4. Proposed use of dowels to stiffen Olympias rowing 
furniture rails, upright and crossbrace, viewed from inboard.
Fig. 1.4.5. A proposed standardized shaft with attachable 
half-blades.
Fig 1.4.6. T op: Single loop grommet made of manila, rawhide 
or ‘ilihau.
Fig 1.4.6. Middle: Single loop grommet that has been twisted 
to remove slack.
Fig. 1.4.6. Bottom: A single loop leather strap, installed.
Fig. 2.1. Olympias being rowed upstream on the Thames 
towards Hammersmith Bridge on T uesday, 15th June, 
1993 (Photo: Rosie Randolph/T rireme T rust).
Fig. 3.1. The “new” knot for tying oars to tholes; the 
stopper knot has been pulled clear, for clarity (Photo: 
Nan Shaw).
Fig. 3.2. Steve Strong (thranite) rowing in seat 20 of Olympias 
in 1994 (Photo: Nan Shaw).
Fig. 3.3. Plan view of Olympias oar-rig altered to allow the 
oarhandle to pass alongside and outboard of the trunk of 
the next rower aft (Drawing: J. T . Shaw).
Fig. 4.1. Measurement of the hogging profile of Olympias in 
July 1994. A cross- wind caused the ship to heel to port, 
a total of 8 cm, as measured by the displacement marks. 
The outrigger thranite oar wales were measured in detail. 
Measurements of the upper wale indicate that the overall 
ship structure was hogged in the same way.
Fig. 4.2. Boat speed recorded by GPS receiver during three 
of the 20-minute sections rowed during a four-hour 
outing on 23 July, 1994. A one-to-two-minute drink 
break was provided every 20 minutes. Descriptive notes 
logged by the recorder during each piece have been added 
to the graphs. The reduction in speed resulting from the 
disruptive impact of turns, cross winds, poor timing and 
boat wash is clearly evident.
Fig. 5.1. The planking of Olympias affected by fungal rot, 
June, 2002 (Photo: Boris Rankov/T rireme T rust).
Fig. 5.2. Olympias during refurbishment at Elefsina Shipyards, 
July, 2003 (Photo: Boris Rankov/T rireme T rust).
Fig. 5.3. Internal view of Olympias after refurbishment, July 
2003, showing new ribs and stringers attached with bolts 
(Photo: Boris Rankov/T rireme T rust).
Fig. 5.4. Olympias moored at the Hellenic Navy Museum, 
July, 2004, with Kyrenia 2  alongside, viewed from the 
battlecruiser G. Averoff (Photo: Boris Rankov/T rireme 
T rust).
Fig. 7.1. The gross mechanical power of athletes of various 
kinds in relation to the duration of their efforts (from 
Shaw 1993b, 65, fig. 10.4).
Fig. 8.1. Proposed modification to Olympias oar-rig, with 
interscalmium of 0.98 m and skewed layout of seats and 
stretchers (Plan 201–12) (Drawing: John Coates).
Fig. 8.2. Existing arrangement of mid-section in Olympias 
(Plan 8) (Drawing: John Coates).
Fig. 9.1. Diagram to calculate the advance of the tholepin 
(i.e. of the ship) per differential angle of sweep of an oar 
knowing the position of the instantaneous turning point 
relative to undisturbed water. The diagram gives a plan 
view of the situation at some stage during the pull. ABCD 
is the line of advance of the tholepin. EBTF and GHCTJ 
are two successive positions of the oar, BC (called ds in the 
main text) being the differential advance of the tholepin, 
greatly exaggerated for clarity. T is the turning point. The 
angle BTC (called dC in the main text) represents the 
differential swept angle, greatly exaggerated. The distance 
BT is called p in the main text. The instantaneous angle 
of attack DCT is called C in the main text. As dC tends 
to zero, BH tends to p.dC, where dC is in radians, and so 
ds tends to p.dC/sin C, i.e. (L – d).dC/sin C (Drawing: 
J. T . Shaw).
Fig. 10.1. General arrangement drawings of Olympias and 
of the proposed second reconstruction superimposed 
(Drawing: John Coates).
Fig. 10.2. Position of ship beams relative to thalamians 
(Drawing: John Coates).
Fig. 10.3. Arrangement of one triad amidships in the proposed 
second reconstruction (Drawing: John Coates).
Fig. 10.4. Proposed oar (Drawing: John Coates).
Fig. 10.5. Plan view of the forward third of the proposed 
oarsystem (Drawing: John Coates).
Fig. 10.6. Hull planking tenons (Drawing: John Coates).
Fig. 15.1. The Athlit ram, showing the point at which the curved 
upper surface returns to the height of the front end.
Fig. 15.2. Schematic velocity/time graph of ships during 
ramming. ∆t marks the time taken for the ram of the 
attacking ship to indent the hull of the ship being rammed.
Fig. 15.3. Hypothetical method by which the oarsmen in a 
ramming ship could brace themselves for the shock, as 
viewed from above.
Fig. 154. Scene from the Cista Ficoronica: Argonaut with oar.
Fig. 15.5. Schematic drawing of the regular arrangement 
of oarsmen with oars of equal length across a trireme, 
as proposed by the author in 1980 (Sleeswyk 1982a), 
===== PAGE 11 =====
compared with a schematic rendering of the Lenormant 
relief.
Fig. 15.6. Graph plotting the total number of oarsmen in a 
ship, and the weight of the ram in kgs, against the number 
of oarsmen per interscalmium on one side of the ship. 
Z, S and D indicate ships rowed alla zenzile, a scaloccio 
and double-manned ( i.e. with oarsmen on both sides of 
the loom) respectively. R I and R II refer to ships without 
outriggers and with outriggers respectively. A represents 
the weight of the Bremerhaven ram and B that of Athlit 
ram. The dashed lines are drawn at a slope of 3 to 2, in 
accordance with the proposed proportionality rule.
Fig. 15.7. Longitudinal and transverse cross-sections of a 
barque du Léman, taken from Pâris 1888, no. 200.
Fig. 15.8. Sea-going ship depicted in the tomb of Sahure, the 
second king of the Fifth Dynasty, 2510–2460 BC. (after 
Borchardt 1913, from Landström 1970). 
Fig. 17.1. Lines of hull of Olympias (Drawing: John Coates).
Fig. 17.2. Slipping and launching from a beach (Drawing: 
John Coates).
Fig. 24.1. Reconstruction of an Athenian trireme. Perspective 
view of the middle (zygians) and upper level (thranites) 
of the oarcrew (after Morrison and Coates 1990, 235, 
fig. 66).
Fig. 24.2. Reconstruction of an Athenian trireme. Longitudinal 
section on the port side showing the room of the oarsmen 
and the sweep of the upper parts of their bodies at the 
beginning and end of a long oarstroke. The hatched beams 
at the level of the thalamians’ heads are 10% closer together 
than the interscalmium of 88.8 cm (drawing modified after 
J. F . Coates in Morrison and Coates 1989, 23, fig. 10).
Fig. 24.3. Photogrammetrical plan of late Roman wreck no. 
4 from Mainz, Löhrstraße (after Böhler, Fachhochschule 
Mainz, Vermessungswesen). Hull interior of the wreck in 
an approximately upright position, elevation (above) and 
plan (below).
Fig. 24.4. Mainz, Löhrstraße. Site of late Roman wreck no. 1 
(photograph by Landesamt für Denkmalpflege, Abteilung 
Archäologische Denkmalpflege, Mainz).
Fig. 24.5. Photogrammetrical plan of late Roman wreck no. 
1 from Mainz, Löhrstraße (after Böhler, Fachhochschule 
Mainz, Vermessungswesen). Hull interior of the wreck 
in an approximately upright position, plan (above) and 
elevation (below).
Fig. 24.6. Oberstimm near Ingolstadt (Bavaria), wrecks no. 1 
(partly covered) and no. 2 (photograph by Mittermüller, 
Bayerisches Landesamt für Denkmalpflege, Ingolstadt).
Fig. 24.7. Oberstimm near Ingolstadt (Bavaria), wreck 1. Plan 
and cross-sections made during excavation (after H. Schaaff, 
Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum Mainz).
Fig. 24.8. Table showing distances between installations 
(tholes, thwarts, floor timbers) found on wrecks dated 
to the Roman period (vessels built in the Mediterranean 
or Romano -Celtic tradition: upper group), and to the 
Migration Period and Middle Ages (vessels built in the 
Nordic tradition: lower group). Measurements are taken 
from centre to centre of the elements indicated: O = 
oarports; R = rowlocks; T = thwarts; F = frames. The 
Baltic and Scandinavian wrecks are those on the list 
published by Crumlin-Pedersen 1997, 110–111, tab. 5.1 
with additions.
Fig. 27.1. T eredo-damaged planking from Olympias. Note 
the damage in and around the planking mortises (Photo: 
Paul Lipke).
Fig. 28.1. Furttenbach’s schematic cross-sectional diagram 
of a Genoese galley of c. AD 1600, showing both the 
cordone on the outside of the hull, and the location of the 
contracordone at m on the inside of the frames.
Fig. 28.2a. Schematic diagram of the run of the hypozoma 
around the hull of a trireme, with bights for two tonoi. The 
scheme gives one of the many obvious possibilities.
Fig, 28.2b. Hypothetical reconstruction of the tonos, which 
fits both the ‘well-twisted rope’ mentioned in the literature 
and mechanical exigencies. The means of closing the hole 
through which the hypozoma bight enters is not shown.
Fig. 28.3. Diagram of the arrangement of the stoppers 
attached to the hypozoma when these are mounted. While 
the tonos inside the hull exerts a force on the bight in the 
hypozoma, two crews of men pull on the stoppers. When 
the men ceased pulling, a large extra force upon the 
hypozoma would have been locked in by friction.
Fig. 29.1. Mortice-and-tenon planking (Photo: John Coates)
Fig. 29.2. Isometric view of Olympias’ structure (Drawing: 
John Coates).
Fig. 29.3. Collision Area (Drawing: John Coates/Robin 
Oldfield).
Fig. 29.4. Elasto-plastic beam model.
Fig. 29.5. Collision headings.
Fig. 29.6. Case A: collision headings for Douglas Fir.
Fig. 29.7. Case A: collision headings for Red Pine.
Fig. 29.8. Case A: headings diagram for Douglas Fir.
Fig. 29.9. Case B: collision headings for Douglas Fir. 
Fig. 29.10. Case B: collision headings for Red Pine.
Fig. 29.11. Case B: headings diagram for Douglas Fir.
Fig. 29.12. Case C: collision headings for Douglas Fir.
Fig. 29.13. Case C: headings diagram for Douglas Fir.
Fig. 29.14. Case A: deceleration for Douglas Fir.
Fig. 29.15. Case C: deceleration for Douglas Fir.
Fig. 29.16. Case E: deceleration for Douglas Fir.
Fig. 30.1. Plan of the Zea shipsheds by Wilhelm Dörpfeld 
(Dragatsis 1886, Pin.2).
Fig. 30.2. Sections of the Zea shipsheds by Wilhelm Dörpfeld 
(Dragatsis 1886, Pin. 3).
Fig. 31.1. Force relationships for an optimised Mark IIb fast 
trireme. 
Fig. 31.2. Speed/time graphs for an optimised Mark IIb fast 
trireme.
Fig. 31.3. Backing away.
Fig. 31.4. Fast anastrophe and tight anastrophe.
Fig. 31.5. Encirclement.
Fig. 31.6. Periplous.
Fig. 31.7. Diekplous with following trireme(s).
Fig. 31.8. Steering for anastrophe or diekplous. 
Fig. 31.9. Diekplous of a rank.
Fig. 31.10. Close formation of a slow fleet. 
Fig. 31.11. Attacking files, multiple threats. 
Fig. 31.12. Concentrated attack on a file. 
List of Figuresx
===== PAGE 12 =====
Acknowledgements
This volume has taken a very long time to come to fruition, 
ever since the conference held at Oxford and Henley on 
Thames in 1998, and my first thanks must go to all the 
contributors for their infinite patience in awaiting the 
outcome. I hope they will feel that it has been worth it. 
I also have to thank, as always, all the members of the 
T rireme T rust and T rireme T rust USA who rowed on 
Olympias or otherwise contributed to the success of the 
1992 sea trials, the 1993 visit to London, and the 1994 
sea trials which are reported here, as well as the officers 
and personnel of the Hellenic Navy without whom none 
of these would have been possible. The members of the 
Council of the T rireme T rust, John Allan, the late John 
Coates, Andrew Morrison, Doug Pattison, John Quenby, 
Rosie Randolph, Andrew Ruddle, Timothy Shaw, Andrew 
Taylor, Ford Weiskittel and Frank Welsh, as well as Annis 
Garfield, Doug Lindsay and the late Sir Charles Willink, 
have given me unwavering support and assistance since 
I took over as Chairman in 1996, and they all have my 
deepest gratitude. Finally, special thanks go to Professor 
Ted Lendon of the University of Virginia, who read 
through most of the reports and papers and made several 
excellent suggestions on how to improve the presentation 
of this book.
Boris Rankov
Wootton by Woodstock
August, 2010
===== PAGE 13 =====

===== PAGE 14 =====
Introduction and Summaries
 
Boris Rankov
Introduction
The first three series of sea-trials of the reconstructed 
Athenian trireme Olympias, which took place in 1987, 
1988 and 1990 respectively, were each published in 
separate volumes some years ago (Morrison and Coates 
1989; Coates, Shaw and Platis 1990; Shaw 1993); in 
addition, a report of the latest trials in 1994 was privately 
published by Timothy Shaw in the same year (Shaw 1994). 
This volume presents reports of the last two series of trials 
in 1992 and 1994 (the latter a slightly revised version of 
the private publication), together with brief accounts of the 
ship’s visit to the Thames in London in 1993 to celebrate 
the 2,500th anniversary of Greek democracy and of her 
appearance on the water in 2004 to carry the Olympic 
flame just before the opening of the Athens Olympics. 
 Supplementing these reports are a number of papers 
presented to a conference held at Corpus Christi College, 
Oxford and the River and Rowing Museum in Henley 
on Thames from 18th to 20th September, 1998, together 
with further papers which for various reasons could not 
be delivered at the conference or were written in its wake. 
The editor here wishes to express his sincere gratitude for 
their patience to all the authors who have waited so long 
for their papers to appear in print. At the same time, the 
opportunity has been taken to include a number of more 
recently-written papers which reflect the ongoing research 
which has been based on the results of the various trials. 
Those results were summarized by the present author in 
the new chapter he wrote for the second edition of The 
Athenian Trireme, published in 2000 (Morrison. Coates 
and Rankov 2000, 231–75). The individual reports and 
many of the papers which follow may be considered as 
presenting the raw data and ‘showing the working’ behind 
that summary; in particular, Part 2 of the volume explains 
in detail the argument for canting the oar-rig. The contents 
of this volume as a whole thus constitute a final report of 
the Olympias sea-trials between 1987 and 1993.
 For those interested in the history of the project as 
a whole, an archive of T rireme T rust papers has been 
collected and electronically catalogued by John Quenby 
and Sharon Shellock, and was deposited at the River and 
Rowing Museum in 2009. This archive includes John 
Coates’ detailed specification, plans and construction 
notebooks for Olympias, together with the letters and 
papers of John Morrison, John Coates and Timothy Shaw, 
as well as other items, relating to the ship’s design, building 
and sea trials. The catalogue may now be consulted on-line 
via the T rireme T rust website (www.triremetrust.org.uk), 
which also gives details on how to consult the archive. 
 At the time of writing, 
Olympias herself is on permanent 
display out of the water near the battle-cruiser G. Averoff at 
the Hellenic Navy Museum in Neo Faliro near the Piraeus 
(Fig. IS.1). There are, however, plans currently being made 
to refurbish the ship in Greece and the United States, and 
for her to be rowed once again in New York City in 2013. 
If those plans materialise, then there may indeed be more 
for others to report. In the meantime, this volume offers 
a wide selection of views and comments on the Olympias 
project, some of them highly critical. Not least amongst 
these is the report of the 1992 trials (see Shaw 1993, viii) 
which was compiled by Paul Lipke and other members of 
T rireme T rust USA, the sister organisation of the original 
T rireme T rust set up by John Morrison, John Coates and 
Frank Welsh in 1982. This and other papers later in the 
volume (notably those of André Sleeswyk and Alec Tilley) 
which take issue with the Olympias design have been 
included to emphasise that the ship is an hypothetical 
reconstruction (or a ‘floating hypothesis’ as Seán McGrail 
(1992) has so aptly described her), and that approaches and 
interpretations are possible which differ considerably from 
those of the T rireme T rust. It should not be assumed that 
the T rust necessarily accepts any or all of these alternative 
interpretations; nevertheless, it firmly believes that debate 
can and should continue.
Summaries of Reports and Papers
The various reports and papers are here summarised as 
a guide to what the reader may expect to find in this 
volume, and where.  
===== PAGE 15 =====
Boris Rankov2
Part 1. The 1992 and 1994 sea trials and other 
excursions
Paul Lipke of T rireme T rust USA presents a report (pp. 
12–39) of the 1992 sea-trials of Olympias compiled with 
the assistance or rowing master Ford Weiskittel  and 
ship’s carpenters John Howarth and Meph Wyeth. The 
introduction (pp. 12–13) explains the genesis of this 
report in a much longer version originally planned by Ford 
Weiskittel, who was one of the 1992 rowing masters and is 
chairman of T rireme T rust USA. Lipke then (pp. 13–16) 
comments upon the effects of the reduced numbers of 
oarsmen participating in 1992 compared with earlier trials, 
and the limits to the accuracy of GPS data available at 
that time; he offers a summary of the outings undertaken 
between 22nd July and 8th August, and provides a sample 
entry from the log kept by trials recorder Andrew Ruddle, 
giving the reader an excellent insight into the progress of 
a typical outing, what sorts of exercises were undertaken, 
and how they were recorded. The next section (pp. 16–21) 
discusses crew management from Lipke’s point of view as 
one of the team leaders in the ship, rather than from the 
viewpoint of a rowing master as in previous reports, and 
notes that this produces different perspectives and insights. 
John Howarth, Paul Lipke and Meph Wyeth (pp. 21–31) 
document their work leading the ship’s running repair team 
during the trials, detailing how the 170 oars, the same 
Figure IS.1. Olympias in her dry-dock and covered shed at the Hellenic Navy Museum, Neo Faliro (Photo: Boris Rankov/
Trireme Trust).
number of seats of wooden furniture, and their leather 
fittings required several hours of maintenance daily both 
during and after outings. Lipke and Weiskittel, (pp. 32–6) 
next offer some interpretations of the operation of the ship 
which differ from those published in previous reports, for 
instance on the relative importance of the bow rowers, on 
the timing of the stroke, and on the relative unimportance 
of the problems caused by the cross-beams or by rowers 
catching a crab; they also suggest that there is no need to 
recruit crews entirely from experienced rowers and that it 
is more realistic to consider 8.3 knots as the fastest sprint 
speed achieved by Olympias than the widely reported 8.9 
knots which was achieved only momentarily (if at all). In 
the next section (pp. 36–7), Lipke and Weiskittel discuss 
where they consider the project to have gone wrong, citing 
an excessive focus in the trials on maximum speeds, the use 
in the ship of unnecessarily thick cross-beams, the location 
of the thalamian seats higher in the hull than they need to 
be, and the interpretation of Vitruvius’ interscalmium as 
being exactly two cubits, which has restricted the length 
of the rowing stroke and has led, it is argued, to the 
unnecessary and impractical proposal that the seats should 
be canted or skewed outwards in any future reconstruction. 
They then (pp. 37–9) make suggestions for future research, 
which include further performance trials, the measurement 
of drift speed, further testing of the redesigned oars, further 
===== PAGE 16 =====
Introduction and Summaries 3
experimentation with non-electronic communication, 
rowing with the oars fitted sternwards of the thole-pin, 
and more sailing trials; away from the ship they advocate 
further research into mortise-and-tenon construction, 
the effects of shipworm, rower physiology, aspects of ship 
design (including a different type of hogging truss) to be 
carried out with small-scale models and CAD, and the 
redesign of the oars. Finally, they comment (p. 39) on a 
more general problem with the project as a victim of its 
own success, the expense and complexity of which makes 
it difficult to construct an alternative, and therefore for 
other researchers to challenge.
 Boris Rankov  summarises (pp. 40–2) the visit of 
Olympias to the Thames in London in June 1993, where 
the ship was rowed up and down the Thames between 
Hammersmith and Tower Bridge and took part in a 
ceremony celebrating the 2,500th anniversary of Greek 
democracy off the Palace of Westminster, during which 
the Greek Minister of Culture, the Senior Officer of the 
Hellenic Navy and the Speaker of the House of Commons 
were welcomed aboard. She also (contrary to regulations) 
passed through Tower Bridge under sail.
 T wo complementary reports of the 1994 sea-trials at 
Poros follow. The first, by trials officer Timothy Shaw  
(pp. 43–9), comprises a summary of findings rather than 
a day-by-day, outing-by-outing account. He notes that 
since the previous sea-trials in 1992, the ship’s hog had 
increased, that there were only around 120 useable oars, 
and that the mainsail needed repairs. He documents the 
new type of knot suggested by a local fisherman and 
successfully used on synthetic cord to attach the oars to 
the tholes, and the measurements taken both on land and 
in the ship to determine the length of stroke which was 
being attained. From this he deduces that the oarsystem 
should be reconfigured by canting the seats as in Cornish 
gigs in order to allow the oars to pass inside the body 
of the rower immediately astern. This would enable the 
maximum possible stroke length to be attained and the 
effective power of the oarcrew to be increased, so as to 
bring the ship’s performance in line with the ancient 
evidence. In 1994, the ship was in any case underpowered 
because only 120 rowers were available, so that the trials 
focused on experimentation in control and command of 
the ship without electronic aids and tests to assist in the 
development of more efficient oars. 
 The second report, by rowing master 
Andrew Taylor 
(pp. 50–7), presents some details of the trials which were 
undertaken with a small, inexperienced crew in a ship 
which was now hogging badly. Rowing was undertaken on 
both three and only two levels at a time, and the maximum 
speeds attained were c. 5 knots over two to three minutes, 
and 6.3 to 7 knots flat out but only momentarily, well 
short of those in earlier sea-trials. Experiments showed 
that some at least of the previous underperformance by 
the thalamian (lowest) level of rowers could be attributed 
to the narrow oarblades with which they were equipped, 
and the importance of the ship’s trim for fast and effective 
rowing was also demonstrated. The ship was effectively 
rowed backwards at 4.5 knots, and at up to 5.6 knots with 
a following wind and, contrary to previous experience, no 
difficulty was experienced with steering the ship in this 
direction. A crew of 130 was embarked in only 6 minutes, 
with the ship ready to row 6 minutes later; anchoring took 
only 4 minutes, and coming off a Mediterranean moor 
3 minutes. 100 rowers were recovered from the water 
onto the ship in 10 minutes. There is thus no doubt that 
the ship could be cleared for action very rapidly. It was 
discovered that drift could be minimised by turning the 
ship broadside to the wind. Techniques for directing the 
oarcrew without electronic speakers were also investigated. 
Finally, it is observed (contrary to the conclusions of the 
1992 report) that the most experienced rowers were also 
the most effective; also that, despite appearances, fixed-seat 
rowing does allow an effective leg-drive
 Finally, 
Boris Rankov gives a brief description (pp. 
58–60) of what has happened to Olympias since the 1994 
sea trials, including her last outing, carrying the Olympic 
torch in 2004 in advance of the Athens Olympic Games.
Part 2. Proposals for a revised design
The second part of the volume consists of a preface and 
three papers by Timothy Shaw and a fourth paper by the 
designer of Olympias, naval architect John Coates which 
are intended to be read together. In these papers, which 
formed the starting point for the 1998 Oxford/Henley 
conference and were pre-circulated ahead of it, they 
present the argument for modifying the Olympias design 
by canting or skewing the oarsystem outboard, so as to 
remove any restriction on the length of stroke which could 
be achieved.
 Timothy Shaw’s preface (p. 62) introduces the rationale 
for revising the design of Olympias. His first paper (pp. 
63–7) considers the statement by Xenophon in Anabasis 
6.4.2 that ‘for a trireme, to Heraclea from Byzantium is a 
long day’s voyage under oar’ as evidence for the cruising 
speed of a trireme. Shaw argues that Xenophon’s statement 
suggests that a trireme of the 4th century BC could 
maintain a cruising speed of between 7 and 8 knots through 
the water. This would therefore be the performance to be 
expected of an appropriately modified Olympias design.
 Shaw’s second paper (pp. 68–75) sets out to show 
that, while the existing Olympias could not be made to 
cruise all day from Byzantium to Heraclea at 7 to 8 knots 
through the water under oar, neither could she, as some 
have suggested, have sustained this cruising speed under 
sail alone or with serious wind-assistance under oar. This 
is because the sea-conditions which the latter would imply 
would either have damaged the ship or prevented rowing 
altogether. From this it follows that the rowing rig should 
be modified to enable the ship to cruise at these speeds 
under oar.
 Shaw’s third paper (pp. 76–81) addresses how the 
Olympias design would need to be modified in order to 
===== PAGE 17 =====
Boris Rankov4
make the ship capable of matching the cruising speed 
implied by Xenophon. He argues that Olympias’ cruising 
speed (about 5.4 knots, with speeds over 7 knots achieved 
only with exceptional and unsustainable effort) is limited 
because the stroke attainable by her oarsmen is too short. 
This can be remedied in two ways: by extending the 
interscalmium , and by canting or skewing the oar-rig 
outboard so that the length of stroke is limited only by each 
oarsman’s physique. He therefore discusses two possible 
modifications: Mark IIa with the interscalmium extended 
to 0.98 m but with the oarsmen’s seats arranged fore-
and-aft as before, and Mark IIb, with the interscalmium 
extended and with the seats skewed outboard by 18.4°. 
Having calculated the force per man and stroke-rates 
required in each of these modified designs to match the 
performance implied by Xenophon, Shaw concludes that 
a ship with an oar-rig skewed as in Mark IIb would be 
the more consistent with such a performance.
 John Coates (pp. 82–9) then  builds on Shaw’s 
conclusions, and on other lessons learnt from the trials 
of Olympias, to propose a modified design for any future 
trireme reconstruction In order to achieve the extra oar 
power required for a trireme to cruise at 7 to 8 knots, it 
will be necessary to increase the interscalmium to 0.98 m 
and skew the rig outboard by 18.4°, as argued by Shaw. 
Increasing the spacing of the beams (as required by the 
extension of the interscalmium) and raising them slightly 
will allow the heads of the lowest (thalamian) level of 
rowers to pass underneath the beams instead of colliding 
with them (see the critiques of Olympias below), while the 
skewing of the rig will both enable a longer stroke and 
move the arc swept forward of athwartships, increasing 
the stroke’s effectiveness. Oars will be light and made of 
spruce, will conform to the longer cubit, and will still be 
rigged forward of the thole-pins. During construction, the 
tenons joining the planking will be tapered and cut to fit 
tightly in the mortices, side planking will be thickened, 
and the hull will be given a slight sag, so as to counter 
the hogging which has affected Olympias. The proposed 
changes will extend the length of the ship from 36.8 m to 
40 m, while its overall width will be increased from 5.45 m 
to 5.60 m (reducing the clearance in the Zea ship sheds to 
7 cm either side). Displacement will increase by between 
5 and 10%; resistance will increase by about 7% at lower 
speeds, but only about 5% at sprint speeds. With these 
changes, cruising speeds of 7.5 knots and flat-out speeds 
of 9.7 knots, as demanded by Shaw’s papers, should be 
attainable.
Part 3. Critiques of Olympias: for and against
Three short papers by maritime historians and archaeologists 
pass some general observations on the Olympias project. 
René Burlet (pp. 94–6) notes some of the strengths and 
successes of the design, which he regards as a realistic 
hypothesis, but also some of the weaknesses such as the 
cramped conditions of the thalamians caused by the 
placing of the cross-beams. He also suggests that fast, 
long-distance voyages in antiquity must have been done 
under sail, not under oar, because, as is apparent from 
later galleys, a ‘human engine’ cannot maintain high 
cruising speeds over long distances. Edwin Gifford (pp. 
97–9) also considers the design of Olympias a success, 
apart from the awkward placing of the cross-beams and 
its effect on the thalamian rowers. He also emphasises how 
tightly the design was determined by naval-architectural 
requirements, even though some maritime archaeologists 
have found this hard to accept. Seán McGrail (p. 100) 
also expresses approval of the project and suggests that the 
proposed Mk II design is likely to be as close to authentic as 
is possible to achieve on the basis of the evidence currently 
available, but on the basis of that evidence questions the 
design requirement for the ship to be capable of cruising 
as fast as 7.5 knots and sprinting at 9 knots (see also the 
papers by Rankov, Wallinga and Whitehead in Part 4).
 The paper by ancient historian 
Tony Papalas (pp. 
101–8) aims to reply to some of the published criticisms 
of Olympias, including those of Lucien Basch (1987; 1988; 
1990), who suggests that the oars should be of different 
lengths and questions the length and construction of the 
hull, and Alec Tilley (1992; 1997), who argues for a trireme 
design based on his interpretation of the Siren Vase (see his 
paper, pp. 121–32). Papalas considers Basch to have been 
overly sceptical and not to have taken sufficient account of 
the Talos Vase. He also argues that Tilley’s reconstruction 
does not conform to the ancient evidence, although he 
does agree with Tilley’s argument on the basis Herodotus 
8.118 that the hold of Olympias appears to be too large. 
Nevertheless, Papalas considers that Olympias  should 
be accepted as a generally authentic representation of a 
Classical Athenian trireme.
 André Sleeswyk (pp. 109–20), an historian of technology, 
takes a far more sceptical view of Olympias. He acknowledges 
the project’s demonstration that a three-level oarystem is 
practicable as a major achievement, but considers that 
insufficient attention has been paid in the design to the 
effects of ramming (for which see now Oldfield’s paper, 
pp. 214–24) and the structure of the hull. He argues that 
when a trireme rammed a larger vessel, it and the oarcrew 
are likely to have suffered a significantly more violent 
retardation than has hitherto been allowed for, and that the 
rowers should therefore have been seated in such a way as 
to be able to withstand this. He also argues that Vitruvius’ 
interscalmium should have been taken as a clear distance 
between tholes, which would give the rowers more room 
and allow for a longer stroke, and that Shaw’s suggestion 
that the oarsystem should be canted or skewed would 
both reduce the efficiency of the stroke and make it more 
difficult for the rowers to brace themselves during ramming. 
He therefore suggests that the ship should have been more 
sturdily built to allow for a greater overall length and so 
a longer interscalmium, or that Hale’s (1996) suggestion 
that a sliding stroke was employed in antiquity should be 
adopted. Sleeswyk postulates that the evidence from the 
===== PAGE 18 =====
Introduction and Summaries 5
Zea shipsheds would have allowed the reconstruction to 
be longer than 40 m, that later evidence suggests that a 
U-shaped hull would have been more appropriate, and 
that the hull itself should have been more strongly built 
to withstand ramming. He also argues that it would have 
been more effective for the hypozoma to be an undergirding 
rather than a hogging truss (see further Sleeswyk’s paper 
below, pp. 207–12), and that for functional reasons the ship 
should have a higher gangway. Sleeswyk’s conception of a 
trireme thus differs considerably from Olympias in detail, 
if not in its general layout.
 The trireme proposed, however, by Alec Tilley  (pp. 
121–32), an experienced sailor and former naval officer, 
differs from Olympias in almost every respect. This is a 
design based on the Siren Vase in the British Museum, 
which depicts the ship of Odysseus. The design has been 
developed in several previous papers by Tilley (1970; 1971; 
1973; 1976; 1992; 1997), and in detail in a monograph 
(2004). Tilley rejects the idea that the Lenormant relief 
shows a three-level ship, or that ancient depictions which 
do show three-level ships portrayed triremes. He argues 
that the three types of trireme rowers – thranites, zygians 
and thalamians – mentioned in the literary and epigraphic 
evidence represent different ranks or positions within 
different parts of the ship. He also believes that the hold 
of Olympias was too large to conform with the evidence of 
Herodutus 8.118, that there should not have been a central 
gangway, and that Olympias in general was much heavier 
and higher than is implied by the ancient evidence. Instead, 
Tilley sees the trireme as a development of a single-level 
pentekontor, with 30 benches and with three men to a 
bench, each with his own oar. His proposed arrangement 
is what he believes to be shown on the Siren Vase: two 
men on each bench rowing their oars on one side of the 
ship and the other man rowing his on the opposite side, 
with the pairs rowing to one side alternating along the 
ship. Tilley supports his individual arguments in a series 
of Appendices (including a response to Papalas’ criticisms, 
pp. 104–7) following the main paper.
Part 4. The operation and performance of ancient 
triremes
The next part of the volume deals with the practicalities 
of the performance and operation of ancient triremes, 
and what the ancient evidence tells us about these aspects. 
It begins with a paper by John Coates (pp. 134–41) in 
which he discusses the requirements for slipping and 
launching both from shipsheds and from open beaches; 
the paper was originally written in response to a proposal 
to reconstruct a shipshed in the Piraeus. Coates explains 
the need for lateral support from the shed structure 
(fitted with softwood rubbing-pads) as the ship moves 
from land to sea and vice versa; how the ship could have 
been moved (on its keel and without the use of a cradle) 
by hauling teams stationed within the shed along either 
side of the groundway using ropes (probably discarded 
hypozomata) looped round the ram; and how there would 
be no need for the slipway to extend into the water, but 
that a wooden guide would have been required to funnel 
the stern onto the centre-line of the groundway as it came 
out of the water. On a beach, a channel would probably 
have to be dug out to reduce the gradient from a typical 
1:5 to something around 1:10 (although such a reduced 
slope could also have been obtained by hauling out at an 
oblique angle to the shore); wooden sleepers would then 
have to be laid down as a groundway, together with bolsters 
to guide the keel; and lateral support would have to be 
provided by ‘walking shores’ (parastatai); once ashore, the 
ship could have been kept upright by supporting it with 
piles of stones, as described by Homer.
 Olympias’ sailing master in 1992 and 1994,  Douglas 
Lindsay (pp. 142–4),  looks at the operation and 
performance of the ship, mainly under sail. He discusses 
‘combined sailing’, i.e. rowing and sailing simultaneously. 
Running before the wind, in light breezes combined sailing 
is less effective than rowing alone, while at the other end 
of the spectrum in stronger winds it becomes impossible 
once boat speed reaches around 7 knots. Close-hauled, it 
might be useful at boat speeds of as little as 1 knot, but 
not at over 5 knots. Under sail alone, the highest speed 
recorded for Olympias is 10.8 knots sailing downwind, and 
Lindsay estimates that 12 knots should easily be attainable. 
Olympias ghosts well, but suffered from extreme weather-
helm when close-hauled. She also sailed well downwind 
with just the boat-sail, and rode well into or before short 
waves, but was subject to significant wind-drag. Under oar, 
in difficult conditions, crew endurance proved to be better 
than might be expected even without extensive training.
 The next three papers offer interpretations of some 
of the key ancient evidence for the cruising speed of 
ancient triremes. Boris Rankov (pp. 145–51)  discusses 
the only voyage from the ancient world for which both 
time taken and distance can be established within narrow 
parameters. Although the voyage in question, undertaken 
by the Roman consul L. Aemilius Paullus in 168 BC, is 
reported by the Roman historian Livy, it can be shown 
beyond reasonable doubt that he is translating directly 
from the Greek historian Polybius, who knew Paullus 
personally. Livy quotes a speech of Paullus in which he 
claimed to have left Brundisium (Brindisi) with his fleet 
as the sun rose and to have arrived at Corcyra (Corfu) at 
the ninth hour of the day. From the rest of the speech, 
we can ascertain that the voyage took place 25 or 26 
days before Paullus won the battle of Pydna, which is 
known to have taken place the day after a lunar eclipse. 
That establishes the day of the crossing as 28th or 29th 
May in the modern calendar, and thus the length of the 
day in question locally as 14 hours 23 minutes. Since the 
Romans divided the daylight into 12 equal hours which 
varied according to the time of year, the ninth hour can 
be calculated as falling between 9 hours 54–56 minutes 
and 10 hours 42–44 minutes after sunrise. The voyage 
itself was almost certainly under oar and can only have 
===== PAGE 19 =====
Boris Rankov6
been either 92, 104 or 117 miles long, depending upon 
which of the three possible landfalls Paullus chose. Taking 
the middle landfall as being the most likely and allowing 
for local winds and currents, the average speed through 
the water of Paullus’ fleet will have been between 6¼ and 
7¾ knots, and most probably somewhere in the middle at 
around 7 knots. Since Paullus’ fleet will have consisted of 
quinqueremes, this implies a slightly faster cruising speed 
for triremes of around 7½ knots, the same as Shaw’s figure, 
p. 67, based on Xenophon’s Byzantium to Heraclea run.
 The historian Herman Wallinga (pp. 152–4), however, 
argues for a much lower figure than that based on the 
Xenophon passage. He believes that Xenophon was happy 
to minimise the sailing time from Byzantium to Heraclea 
in order to stress the closeness to those two Greek cities 
of Kalpes Limen, which lay between them and where 
Xenophon hoped to found a Greek colony. Wallinga 
suggests that this is what is likely to have provoked one 
ancient reader to add the word mala (‘very’) to the phrase 
‘long day’s voyage’ in the margin of his copy, from which 
it passed to some of the manuscripts which have survived. 
Wallinga therefore discounts the validity of Xenophon’s 
testimony, and prefers instead to accept a figure of between 
5.25 and 5.53 knots implied by Thucydides (8.101) in his 
account of Mindaros’ voyage of 95 sea miles from Arginusae 
to the Dardanelles in 17 to 18 hours in 405 BC.
 Another historian, 
Ian Whitehead (pp. 155–60), who 
acted as Chief Recorder in Olympias during the 1987 and 
1988 sea trials takes a different approach. He argues that 
Xenophon’s Byzantium to Heraclea voyage would most 
likely need to be undertaken under both oar and sail, 
and cannot therefore be used to calculate cruising speed 
under oar. He also denies that Xenophon’s account (Hell. 
6.2.11–14; 6.2.27–32) of Iphicrates’ voyage round the 
Peloponnese in 373 BC can be used show that voyaging 
under oar was necessarily faster than voyaging under sail. 
Instead, he suggests that it was normal for ancient crews 
to row in contrary or light favourable winds and to sail 
the rest of the time. It may also have been normal to row 
in shifts, one level at a time, or even to allow the whole 
crew to take breaks, while ships in flight normally did so 
under their boat-sail. From all this, he concludes that the 
fastest voyages were made under a combination of oar and 
sail according to changing conditions.
 The last two papers in this part of the volume look at 
some physiological aspects of trireme performance under 
oar. John Coates (pp. 161–4) considers the power output 
required to match the performance figures implied by 
Thucydides (3.49) for the dash from Athens to Mytilene 
in 427 BC and by Xenophon ( Anabasis 6.4.2) for a ‘long 
day’s’ voyage, interpreted as 20 hours, of 129 sea miles 
from Byzantium to Heraclea in the Black Sea in the 
early fourth century BC, i.e. at an average of 6.45 knots. 
Coates bases his calculations on a rowing efficiency in 
Olympias of 53–55%, as calculated by Timothy Shaw, and 
a thermal efficiency for the human body as a heat engine 
of 22–25%. He also draws on figures for sustainable gross 
power from a human engine published by Monod (1981), 
MacFarlane (1981, derived from a study of sugar-cane 
cutters in Queensland), and Nadel and Bussolari (1988, 
from measurements taken during the Daedalus project, 
a four-hour, 119-km man-powered flight from Crete to 
Santorini). From all these, Coates concludes that intensive 
training would have enabled a crew to sustain speeds over a 
period of four hours which were 1.5 times those sustained 
by untrained crews. The most efficient cycle physiologically 
would be for the crew to row in shifts of four hours at the 
oar followed by two hours of rest. Finally, he calculates 
that a modern untrained crew, rowing in shifts 2/3 on 
1/3 off, would have to maintain a cruising speed of 4.5 
knots in Olympias for their performance to match the 
speeds implied by Thucydides and Xenophon; in a Mark 
IIb trireme, they would have to maintain 5.1 knots; in 
Olympias, a trained crew would have to maintain 6.0 knots. 
The thrust of the paper is thus the need for a Mark IIb 
oarsystem of greater efficiency than Olympias, and for a 
fully trained and extremely fit crew to row it, if the 6.45 
knot average implied by Thucydides and Xenophon are 
actually to be achieved. 
 The paper by exercise physiologists 
Harry Rossiter  
and Brian Whipp (pp. 165–8) seeks, like that of Coates 
to investigate trireme performance under oar from a 
physiological angle, an approach they refer to as paleo-
bioenergetics. They adopt a more severe interpretation 
than Coates of the sustained cruising speed implied by 
the ancient sources as being 7.2 knots, and assume that 
the whole crew would be rowing throughout, rather 
than in shifts. Also unlike Coates, who considers mainly 
comparative evidence for human power outputs, they 
focus on human energy requirements for long-duration 
rowing: the latter has to be carried out at a rate which 
does not exhaust muscle glycogen if performance is not to 
drop off severely. Their calculations suggest that this rate 
would have been in the region of 80 w per man, whereas 
Olympias (as opposed to a Mark IIb trireme) would require 
a sustained output of around 115 w per man to cruise at 
7.2 knots; of this 115 w, however, only some 62 w would 
be utilised for actual propulsion, the remaining 53 w being 
lost through mechanical inefficiencies in the oar-system. 
It is noted, moreover, that the ability to sustain even 80 
w per man would be affected by factors such as diet, heat, 
fluid intake, the fixed-seat oar-rig, and the physical stature 
of the rowers. Rossiter and Whipp therefore conclude that 
the mechanical efficiency of Olympias’ oar system would 
have to be significantly improved in a Mark II trireme to 
achieve a sustainable cruising speed of 7.2 knots, even with 
the whole crew rowing. This would be difficult, though 
not impossible, to attain, but would require a crew of 
outstanding fitness. Their conclusions, based on a slightly 
different interpretation of the ancient sources and on more 
recent and different types of physiological studies, are thus 
nevertheless broadly in line with those of Coates.
===== PAGE 20 =====
Introduction and Summaries 7
Part 5. Aspects of trireme construction and 
maintenance
This part of the volume begins with the first English 
translation of a paper by marine archaeologist Ronald 
Bockius (pp. 170–81), which was presented at the Henley/
Oxford conference and subsequently published in German 
(Bockius 2000). Bockius presents the comparative evidence 
for the interscalmium, the distance between thole-pins, in 
surviving Roman oared shipwrecks. The latter in Olympias 
was based on the implication in a passage of the Roman 
architect Vitruvius (De Architectura 1.2.4) that the distance 
was normally two cubits, interpreted by Morrison and 
Coates as being 2 × 0.444 = 0.888 m, i.e. c. 89 cms; 
the ship’s sea trials, however, suggested that this was too 
restrictive of stroke-length to allow optimal performance 
to be achieved, which has led to a proposed interscalmium 
for Mark II of 0.98m/98 cms based on the cubit shown on 
the Salamis relief (Shaw, above pp. 76–81; Coates, above, 
pp. 82–91). The interscalmia of one of the late-Roman 
military shipwrecks found at Mainz (wreck 4) fall within 
the range of 84 to 92 cms, and of another (wreck 1) within 
the range of 95 to 96 cms. The interscalmia of one of 
the two military vessels dating from c. 100 AD found at 
Oberstimm in Bavaria (wreck 1) vary between 95 and 99 
cm, and in the other (wreck 2) between 94 and 96 cms. 
Other Roman wrecks from Vechten in the Netherlands, 
Yverdon in Switzerland and Herculaneum provide figures 
of between 92 and 112.5 cms, but none of these vessels is 
thought to be military. Bockius’ overall conclusion is that 
the Roman evidence suggests that there was no absolute 
standard for the length of the interscalmium in oared 
vessels, and that ancient shipwrights did not necessarily 
seek to optimise speed by using interscalmia longer than 
those in Olympias.
 John Coates (pp. 182–4) next considers why ancient 
warships are known to have regularly ‘dried out’. He 
concludes that while bilge-water and absorption of water 
by the wooden hull would not have had a significant affect 
on a ship’s speed, it would have reduced her acceleration 
and agility, the extent of which would be best tested by 
experiment. He calculates that, in a ship which required 
drying-out, bilge-water up to the tops of the floors would 
have been the maximum tolerable before bailing because 
of the likelihood of straining and damaging the hull, 
although the sinking effect of this water would counter 
any loss of stability. It would therefore be practicable 
and safe to carry out an experiment on the effects of this 
amount of bilge water on agility in Olympias or any similar 
reconstruction.
 In two separate papers, Paul Lipke considers the causes 
of leakage and hull deterioration in ancient triremes. In 
the first paper, with contributions by John Coates (pp. 
185–202), he attributes these problems partly to the 
crushing and slippage of adjacent planks in their hulls, the 
result of the tendency of long, narrow ships to ‘hog’ and 
of tenons being insufficiently tight within their mortises. 
These, Lipke suggests, would have limited the practical 
life of a trireme to between 8 and 14 years. Tightness of 
tenons would have been affected by the moisture content 
of planks and tenons during construction, with the tenons 
needing to be fitted dry so that they would not shrink 
further after completion. Nevertheless, varying climatic 
conditions and the cycles of immersion and drying out 
would inevitably have caused gaps to develop between 
tenons and their mortises, which would in turn have led 
to plank-slippage and leakage. Lipke also considers the 
importance of matching tenons and mortise strength to 
resist shear forces but notes that crushing of the tenons, 
and therefore hogging and leakage, were inevitable. The 
swelling of adjacent planks though initial immersion in 
water would also have led to their crushing each other 
through ‘compression set’, leading to leakage when they 
were re-immersed after drying; the same problem would 
have affected tenons within their mortises. This problem 
would have been worst in the intermediate zone between 
the underwater planking and the completely dry planking 
high above the waterline, which is also the zone of the 
neutral axis of Olympias which is subject to the greatest 
shear forces. Most of the damage would be done within 
24–48 hours of relaunch after drying out. Measurements of 
Olympias show that by 1992 she had hogged differentially 
by 9 cm on the starboard side and 13 cm on the port, i.e. 
that she had twisted. Lipke suggests that these problems 
might be mitigated by cutting tenons so that their radial 
planes would be oriented fore-and-aft, as in the Marsala 
wreck, and by making tenons and planking thicker around 
the oarports. He nevertheless concludes that more research 
into the mortise-and-tenon dynamics in shipbuilding is 
required.
 Paul Lipke’s second paper (pp. 203–6) investigates 
the damage caused to wooden hulls by shipworm ( teredo 
navalis) and, in contrast to Coates, identifies this as 
the primary reason for the hauling ashore and drying 
out of triremes. Ancient galleys of mortise-and-tenon 
construction would have been particularly susceptible to 
shipworm, and could have been rendered unseaworthy 
within a couple of months of an infestation. The only 
remedy would have been to replace the planking affected. 
Regular hauling-out would kill off the larvae, but the longer 
the ship had been in the water, the longer it would have 
to be dried out – possibly weeks – for this to be effective. 
Lipke suggests that shipworms were the most likely cause 
of the leakiness of Nicias’ ships at Syracuse in 414/13 BC 
(Thucydides 7.12.3), and goes as far as to suggest that they 
were the trireme’s greatest weakness. Again, he advocates 
further research into their impact (on test-sections rather 
than on Olympias!).
 This part of the volume concludes with a paper by 
André Sleeswyk (pp. 207–12) on the wooden cordone and 
contracordone fitted longitudinally around 17th-century 
Genoese galleys. These timbers were fitted under tension 
and compression respectively, so as to prevent the shell 
from separating from the frames, as a form of permanent 
===== PAGE 21 =====
Boris Rankov8
frapping. Sleeswyk derives the ancestry of these devices 
from the hypozoma fitted to ancient triremes, which 
he does not believe acted as an internal hogging truss 
(contra Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 196), as 
in Olympias, but was a rope fitted longitudinally under 
tension outside the hull, counterbalanced by an internal 
wooden contracodone under compression. The external 
rope would have to be supported by passing it at 90º 
through the hull and the contracordone at the bow and 
stern on opposite sides, and then tensioned within the 
hull at both places as, Sleeswyk suggests, is described by 
Apollonius Rhodius ( Argonautica 1.367–9) and implied 
by an Athenian inscription ( IG 12 73).
Part 6. Recent research
The final part of the volume consists of three papers 
presenting new research carried out since the 1998 
conference. Two of these of papers, by Oldfield and 
Taylor arise out of an (unsuccessful) 2006 research-grant 
application to the Arts and Humanities Research Council 
of the United Kingdom to investigate ancient naval warfare 
utilising the data produced by the Olympias project. The 
other paper, by Rankov, reflects some of the results of 
another research project arising out of the Olympias project, 
on Shipsheds of the Ancient Mediterranean. This project was 
funded by the Leverhulme T rust, whose generous support 
is here gratefully acknowledged, and will eventually be 
published in full by Cambridge University Press; the 
paper presented here was originally delivered to the Tropis 
X conference organised by the Hellenic Institute for the 
Preservation of Nautical T radition on Hydra, Greece from 
27 August to 2 September, 2008, and the editor is grateful 
to Mr Harry Tzalas for granting his permission to publish 
a revised version here. 
 The paper by Robin Oldfield  (pp. 214–24) is based 
on his 2007 MSc thesis in the Department of Mechanical 
Engineering at University College, London, supervised by 
Professor Simon Rusling. He analyses and models the likely 
effects of ramming collisions between triremes of similar 
construction to Olympias with the type of performance 
projected for Coates’ modified design (see above). The 
viable collision headings for an attacking trireme to 
cripple an opponent without itself becoming stuck are 
thus established and are found to be limited and relatively 
narrow, and it is shown that, travelling flat out, a pursuing 
trireme required a speed advantage of as little as 0.50 
knots to be successful. The greater the speed differential, 
the wider the arcs of successful collision headings, but the 
greater the absolute speed of the two ships, the greater the 
deceleration caused to the attacker, with possible adverse 
effects for its oarcrew.
 Boris Rankov’s paper (pp. 225–30) notes that the 
shipsheds excavated by Dragatses and Dörpfeld in 1885, 
which formed a major basis for the dimensions of the 
Olympias  reconstruction were divided by alternating 
colonnades with intercolumnar spacings of 2.16 m and 
3.38–3.39 m respectively. The ratio between these facings 
is exactly 7:11, which suggests that these sheds were laid 
out utilising a foot-module of 0.308 m, a variant of a 
foot-module which has been recognised elsewhere ( e.g. 
in the Parthenon) and is known as a ‘common foot’. This 
evidence of modular construction raises the possibility that 
the sheds were built to take warships which, as has already 
been suspected, were also built modularly. Rankov argues 
that the sheds appear to have been laid out to house vessels 
with an overall breadth of 18 ‘common’ feet (5.544 m) and 
a breadth:length ratio of 1:7, and which were thus 126 
‘common’ feet (38.8 m) long. This would be 2 m longer 
than Olympias but 0.8 m shorter than the proposed Mark II 
trireme based on dimensions taken from the Salamis relief 
(see pp. 76–91); this would not prevent the adoption of 
the canted or skewed oar-rig proposed for Mark IIb, and 
might even be a very marginally faster design because of 
the reduced hull-length.
 Finally, 
Andrew Taylor (pp. 231–43) derives the typical 
acceleration, deceleration and manoeuvring characteristics 
of a fast, Mark IIb trireme from the mass of data produced 
by the five sets of Olympias trials. He then uses these 
characteristics and war-gaming techniques to model a series 
of battle manoeuvres by individual ships and squadrons. 
These reveal, amongst other things, that an individual 
ship could come as close as 180 m to another individual 
ship, or 250 m to a whole line of ships abreast, and still 
back or turn away without danger of being caught; that 
triremes could safely circle only 60 m out from a stationary 
defensive kuklos; and that a gap in a line of ships only 
150 m long was sufficient to allow an enemy to carry out 
a successful diekplous. This then allows him to develop a 
tactical paradigm for how a fast fleet might attempt to 
break up a slow fleet in defensive formation. 
 Taylor’s paper thus provides an example of how the data 
from Olympias could be used in future to model a whole 
range of trireme tactics, both manually and with the aid of 
computers. If this volume as a whole provides a stimulus 
to further research into ancient oared ships and seafaring, 
then it will have served its purpose. As it went to press, 
we sadly learned of the death of John Coates on 10th July, 
2010 at the age of 88, and it is dedicated to his memory 
and that of John Morrison.
Bibliography
Basch, L. (1987) Review article on The Greek Trireme of the 
Fifth Century BC: discussion of a projected reconstruction 
edited by John Coates and Seàn McGrail, and The Athenian 
Trireme: the history and reconstruction of an ancient Greek 
warship by J. S. Morrison and J. F . Coates. The Mariner’s 
Mirror 73.1, 93–105.
Basch, L. (1988) The Eleusis Museum trireme and the Greek 
trireme. The Mariner’s Mirror 74.2, 163–197.
Basch, L. (1990) La galère de l’Antiquité. In Quand voguaient 
les galères. Paris, 22–23.
Bockius, R. (2000) Gleichmaß oder Vielfalt? Zum 
interscalmium bei Vitruv ( De architectura I 2,21 f.). In 
===== PAGE 22 =====
Introduction and Summaries 9
Studia Antiquaria. Festschrift für Niels Bantelmann zum 60. 
Geburtstag. Universitätsforschungen zur prähistorischen 
Archäologie. Institut für Vor- und Frühgeschichte der 
Universität Mainz. Bd 63. Bonn, R. Habelt.
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (eds) (1990) The 
Trireme Trials 1988. Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea Trials 
of Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Hale, J. R. (1996) The Lost T echnology of Ancient Greek 
Rowing. Scientific American 274, 66–71.
Macfarlane, W. V. (1981) Vie et travail dans les climats 
chauds. In Scerrer et al. 1981, 265–289. 
McGrail, S. (1992) Replicas, reconstructions and floating 
hypotheses. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 
21, 353–5.
Monod, H. (1981) Défense énergétique chez l’homme. In 
Scherrer et al. 1981, 107–138
Morrison, J. S. and Coates, J. F . (eds) (1989) An Athenian Tri-
reme Reconstructed. The British Sea Trials of Olympias, 1987. 
BAR International Series 486. Oxford, Archaeopress. 
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F ., and Rankov, N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd ed. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press.
Nadel, E. R. and Bussolari, S. R. (1988) The Daedalus Project: 
Physiological Problems and Solutions. American Scientist 
(July–August), 351–360.
Scherrer, J. et al. (1981) Précis de physiologie du travail, notions 
d’ergonomie. 2nd ed. Paris, Masson et Cie.
Shaw, J. T. (ed.) (1993) The Trireme Project . Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.  Oxford, Oxbow 
Books
Shaw, J. T . (1994) The 1994 Trireme Trials. Research Results 
and Discussion. Watlington.
Tilley, A. F . (1970) The ship of Odysseus. Antiquity 44, 
100–104. 
Tilley, A. F . (1971) ‘An experiment under oars’, Antiquity 45, 
plates 10 and 11.
Tilley, A. F . and Fenwick, V . H. (1973) Rowing in the ancient 
Mediterranean: a new aspect. The Mariner’s Mirror 59, 
96–9.
Tilley, A. F. (1976) Rowing the trireme – a practical 
experiment in seamanship. The Mariner’s Mirror 62.4, 
357–369.
Tilley, A. F . (1992) Three men to a room – a completely 
different trireme. Antiquity 66, 599–610.
Tilley, A. F . (1997) Ancient warships – a scientific approach. 
In Cogar, W . B. (ed.), New Interpretations in Naval History: 
selected papers from the Twelfth Naval History Symposium. 
Annapolis MD, Naval Institute Press, 1ff.
Tilley, A. F . (2004) Seafaring in the Ancient Mediterranean. 
New Thoughts on Triremes and Other Ancient Ships. BAR 
International Series 1268. Oxford, Archaeopress.
===== PAGE 23 =====

===== PAGE 24 =====
Part 1
The 1992 and 1994 Sea T rials 
and Other Excursions
===== PAGE 25 =====
1. Olympias 1992 T rials Report
Edited by Paul Lipke
Acknowledgements
Paul Lipke
My thanks go to the Hellenic Navy, the entire Olympias 
trials staff and crew, and particularly to Ben Brungraber, 
Denis Chagnon, John Coates, Ben Fuller Jr., John 
Howarth, John Morrison, Seán McGrail, and Ford 
Weiskittel for their expert advice and support.
  Perhaps the most important ‘Lesson Learned’ in the 
course of the T rireme Project is that such a huge project 
only moves forward on the patience, determination and 
support of the families of the participants. It would be 
impossible to count their hours of clerical and logistical 
support, waiting, heat prostration and the many meals they 
lovingly prepared, and that then grew cold while they waited 
for their trireme-addicted relative. They did all this with 
the utmost good nature, in support of obscure historical 
research and their loved ones having a great deal of fun.
  Thus the author has special debts of gratitude to pay to 
Jane Coates, Mary Morrison, Kati Rankov, Ann Roberts, 
Nan Shaw, Harriot, Elisabeth and Charlotte Weiskittel, 
and the mostly-unknown-but-very-appreciated families of 
the rowers with whom I’ve been honoured to work.
  These chapters are dedicated to my wife Marcelle Lipke, 
in deep appreciation of her constant good humour and 
support through 24 years (and counting) of my fascination 
with the trireme project.
1.1. Introduction: salvaging value from a failed 
effort to publish a 1992 Olympias sea trials 
report
Paul Lipke and Ford Weiskittel
Nearly two decades ago, we were asked to write and edit the 
1992 Olympias sea trials report. This remains unfinished due 
to various complications, other obligations (such as earning 
a living), and an overly ambitious outline for the work. The 
envisioned publication was to be written to be valuable to 
both specialist and non-specialist audiences, and include 
new data and perspectives in a number of areas. 
One advantage of having developed such an expansive 
outline is that it offers insights into new areas of study. 
Therefore, in order to advance any future sea trials, 
historical research, and publications, and to inform readers 
of some broad concepts worth consideration, below are 
brief descriptions of the major areas that were to be 
included in the 1992 report. Some of these topics are 
considered briefly in the context of other chapters within 
the publication you have before you.
I. 1992 Aims and performance on the water:
a) Ship position and speed measurements: quality of data 
from the ship’s log and the global positioning system
b) Details of rowing performance in daily outings:
 Minute-by-minute logs, highlights, including 1 hour of 
firm, longest row, fastest speed, turning, rowing astern, 
etc.
c) Details of rowing performance on voyage to Corinth and 
Salamina: route, wind, duration of rows, speed made 
good, sailing performance 
d) Performance comparison with other trials: from sprints to 
voyages, addressing speed, power and pacing, including 
tables of adjusted data for earlier trials
e) Operation with partial crews
II. The thesis that Olympias ’ previously published 
performance data warrants even further caveats than 
those presented in the Log Summary (see Chapter 1.2: 
Some Results of Olympias’ 1992 trials), due primarily to 
lack of data and errors in performance of the measuring 
equipment. This makes suspect any interpretations and 
debates about Olympias’ viability based largely on her top 
speed. There are many other, far more valid, reasons to value 
Olympias, her performance and the entire project.
III. Brief commentaries by veteran naval architects and 
shipwrights who have worked on other historic vessels, 
===== PAGE 26 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 13
replicas and reconstructions. We wanted their insights 
on how much Olympias design ‘pushes the envelope’ in 
terms of strength, safety, and hull durability. This proposed 
chapter was in no way intended to call into question John 
Coates’ extraordinary work designing Olympias. Rather 
we sought to provide non-specialists with a relative sense 
of how extreme Olympias is from an engineering point 
of view, and how far and in what ways more or less 
conservative safety and performance standards might affect 
the design. Could a ‘more risky’ ship gain materially better 
performance, and in what parts of the ship might the most 
effective risks be taken?
a) Useful questions for evaluating the design of any trireme 
reconstruction in the context of what we have learned. 
b) Ship construction and repair:
 i) Daily maintenance needs of triremes: frequency 
of repairs, the tools and materials likely carried on 
board
 ii) Possible battle preparations and likely repair 
strategies
IV. The evolution of our understanding of the optimum 
trireme stroke, ‘How to row Olympias’, and how the latter 
might differ from rowing in a trireme where stroke length 
is completely unrestricted.
V. The human engine:
a) Rower physiques and the necessary interscalmium (the 
‘room’ or space required for a fixed-seat rower to pull 
effectively)
b) Rower physiology:
 i) The performance of our rowers in comparison to 
modern athletic performance
 ii) How fit Olympias’ oarcrews have been 
 iii) Using collected volume of oxygen uptake data and 
pulse monitors to relate the performance of rowers 
in the ship to their physiological capacity
 iv) Measuring effective power delivered to the ship
 v) Predicting ship’s performance and crew power output 
on the basis of this data for a given crew size, gender 
and fitness
VI. Suggested protocols for future trials
1.2. Some results of Olympias’ 1992 trials and 
log summary
Paul Lipke, Andrew Ruddle and Ford Weiskittel, with 
assistance from Charles Hirschler
The principal efforts of the 1992 sea trials were to explore 
operations with a reduced crew, crew performance during 
longer voyages/hours at the oar, and to improve the 
accuracy of our speed and position data using Global 
Positioning System (GPS) technology.
1.2.1 Reduced numbers of crew and crew performance
The oarcrew in 1992 numbered approximately 154 (out 
of a possible complement of 170) at the start of the trials, 
and reached a low of 121 on August 8, 1992 (the low 
numbers resulted in part from a late decision to conduct 
trials, and therefore a late recruiting effort.) Despite the 
low numbers, the ship and crew performed well. In fact the 
reduced 1992 crew rowed better and faster more quickly 
than the full 1990 crew, especially during the first four 
training days (this period was followed by a physically 
demanding voyage leading to cumulative fatigue). Since 
the 1992 crew was no more fit physically than earlier crews, 
we believe the improved performance reflects continuing 
advances in training and coaching methods. 
 A full hour of non -stop, ‘firm’ rowing showed what a 
small crew might do under short-term pressure to perform, 
i.e. in battle. A 156 kilometre (112 nautical mile) voyage 
to Aegina, Corinth, Salamina and return to Poros tested 
the small crew’s stamina, especially during an 11-hour, 
non-stop row into headwinds reaching 20 knots with 
higher gusts.
 During much of this long day the crew rowed in 
rotations of 40 minutes on, 20 minutes off, the thalamian 
seats being occupied by those who were resting. In such 
a headwind it was very important to maintain the ship’s 
headway (and thereby her heading) while the oarcrew were 
swapping seats. This was achieved by reducing the time 
needed to complete a rotation to well under two minutes 
(sometimes as little as 80 seconds) and/or by keeping the 
bow or stern rowing while the balance of the crew changed 
seats and started up again.
1.2.2 Global Positioning System: accuracy of trials 
data 
Researched by Charles Hirschler, written by Paul Lipke
Previous trials relied primarily on a somewhat inaccurate 
ship’s log for speed measurements (Morrison and Coates 
1989, 44–5; Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 23–4). 
Measurements by Dutch log (which involves dropping a 
buoyant object, such as a wooden block, off the ship’s bow 
and counting the seconds needed for the vessel’s length 
to travel past the block.) and timed runs past measured 
markers on shore were used to develop an adjusting factor 
which reduced any recorded reading to 89% of the value 
displayed. It must be said that almost everyone involved 
lacked confidence in both the log and the adjusting factor. 
The 1992 results call for further modest adjustments, but 
overall greatly increased confidence in the data.
 In 1992 Global Positioning Systems used signals 
from 3–7 orbiting satellites to provide highly accurate 
measurements of position, speed and distance traveled 
anywhere on the surface of the earth. It must be said here 
that GPS accuracy claims fuel stiff competition between 
manufacturers. Furthermore, there are tensions between 
users, manufacturers and the military because the latter 
intentionally introduces random error in the signals in 
the interests of national security. The introduction of 
error is called ‘selective availability’ and is measured by the 
Horizontal Dilution of Precision (HDOP). 
===== PAGE 27 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke14
 The manufacturer of the T rimble Ensign hand-held 
GPS used in the 1992 trials claims in their literature that 
under the best conditions it will determine your two-
dimensional position on the globe to within 10 metres 
(vertical position accuracy is not considered here since 
Olympias is always at sea level). When the signals are being 
degraded, as they have been (until recently) at virtually all 
times except during the 1990 Gulf War, GPS accuracy is 
limited to twice this distance, or 20 metres multiplied by 
the HDOP . 
 Typical HDOPs during the 1992 trials consisted of: 
 Lows of 1.4, i.e. accuracy was 20 m x 1.4 = 28 m (92 ft) 
 Highs of around 3.0, i.e. = 60 m (198 ft)
 For entire outings, the HDOP averaged 2.1, giving an 
accuracy of 42 m (138 ft). 
An average accuracy of ±138 feet of the position displayed 
seems realistic. Over distances of a few miles or more such 
an error is small. Over short distances, i.e. for a 2000 metre 
(1.25 mile) row, assuming an error of up to 42 meters 
(138 feet) seems reasonable and reduces the usefulness of 
the GPS for establishing distance traveled.
1.2.3 Speed
Speed resolution is ± one unit of the smallest units 
displayed per second ( i.e. if the GPS displays 5.1 knots, 
actual speed could be 5.2 or 5.0 knots). Speed readings are 
more accurate under ‘selective availability’ than position 
readings because the error factor in the satellites’ signals 
changes gradually over time. This means the built-in error 
factor does not affect the speed readings which are based 
on changes in relative positions taken within a few tenths 
of a second of each other. One of the major factors that 
typically has significant negative impact on GPS speed 
accuracy, i.e. blockage of the signal by buildings, bridges, 
and mountains is clearly not a problem on the water. 
 The published maximum speed record of 8.9 knots 
(Shaw 1993, 43) achieved during the morning outing on 
9th August, 1990 deserves some discussion. The figure of 
8.9 knots has since been widely published and quoted as 
Olympias’s top speed. It should be said however, that this 
run had an average speed of 8.3 knots (adjusted) for the 
last half of the run with a single reading of 8.9 knots at 
the very end of the run (Table 1.2.1).
 Clearly the 8.9 knot (corrected) reading was not 
sustained for any appreciable period, whereas the 8.3 knot 
adjusted average is solid. 
 In 1992, we sought to get a better sense of the accuracy 
of the 1990 (and earlier) readings. We received some 
reassurance, but the peak of 8.9 knots remains a little 
suspect. For example, the GPS consistently displayed 
7.8–7.9 knots for a 2-minute speed run with a reduced 
oarcrew of about 135. This is consistent with an 8.3 knot 
average achieved with a full crew in 1990. 
 The next day, with a reduced crew of 121, a brief peak 
of 8.2 knots was recorded by the GPS. Given this and other 
runs with a small crew at speeds well above seven knots, 
the authors believe a brief peak speed of about 8.5 knots 
and more sustained speeds of 8.3 knots can be claimed for 
Olympias with confidence. Given the previous uncertainty 
about the accuracy of the ship’s log and the correction 
factors used in 1990, the GPS readings are reassuring.
 This lower number is further strengthened by the speeds 
recorded in 1988 with a laser tracking system called a 
geodimeter, which showed that a less well-trained crew 
was capable of producing a burst of 7.9 knots, with most 
of the acceleration runs producing speeds from 7.3–7.5 
knots (Lowry and Squire 1988, 53–60).
1.2.4 Summary of results of the 1992 trials of 
Olympias 
Based on Andrew Ruddle’s log
Note: The early days of each set of trials have always focused 
primarily on crew training and adjustment. This means 
getting the international crew understand the command 
language and process on board, learning to row in unison 
with 169 other people, moving rowers around the ship 
to find levels and triads within which they row and mesh 
well, etc. 
Trials day 1: (22/7/92): max speed of 5.8 Nautical Miles/
hour (NM/Hr) 
Trials day 2: (23/7/92): max speed of 6.0 NM/Hr
Trials day 3: (24/7/92): max speed of 6.9 NM/Hr, distance 
covered 6.78 NM
Trials day 4: (25/7/92): max speed of 6.3 NM/Hr
Overview of the Voyage
This was four-day voyage totaling 111.85 NM: 67.8 NM 
rowing, 7.7 NM rowing/sailing, 24.3 NM sailing; 4.73 
NM under tow (through the Corinth Canal). Some long 
passages were made under oar as a bireme, with rowers 
pulling in shifts of 40 minutes on, 20 minutes off; rotating 
rowers between active and inactive seats took well under 
two minutes. See below for more details.
 NB: In the following data set, average speeds were 
Strokes/minute (SPM): 
SPM: 38  41  42  43  44  45  45  44  45  47  46
Knots:  5.8  6.0  5.9  6.2  6.3  6.6  6.9  7.2  7.4  8.0  8.1  8.0  8.1  8.2  8.1  8.1  8.3  8.5  8.6  8.5  8.9
Minutes-seconds (M-S):
M-S:  0.00    0.30     1.00    1.15    1.30
T able 1.2.1
===== PAGE 28 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 15
calculated from the time rowing actually started to time 
rowing stopped. Time waiting for support vessels and other 
delays are not included.
Trials day 5: Voyage day one (26/7/92): 
Poros to Aegina: 15.77 NM in 4 hrs 16 min time overall, 
an average of 3.7 knots into wind of 10 knots or less.
Trials day 6: Voyage day two (27/7/92): 
Aegina to Corinth: 33.06 NM in 11 hrs, 7 min time 
overall; rowing 28.33 NM in 9 hrs, 38 min into wind 
(20–50 degrees off starboard bow with the wind speed 
averaging 20 knots) for an average of 2.9 knots; tow of 
4.73 NM through the Corinth canal.
Trials day 7: Voyage day three (28/7/92): rest day 
Trials day 8: Voyage day four (29/7/92): 
Corinth to Salamina: 30.73 NM in 8 hrs, 55 min overall 
for an average for the day of 2.3 knots; rowing and row/
sail 20.9 NM (18.7 row and 2.2 row/sail) for 8 hrs and 
9 min at an average of 2.56 knots into a 15–20 knot 
wind 0–35 degrees off the starboard bow and seas of up 
to 0.75 metre.
Trials day 9: Voyage day five (30/7/92): unplanned rest day 
Trials day 10: Voyage day six (31/7/92): 
Salamina to Poros: 32.29 NM in 6 hrs, 18 min overall, for 
an average for the day of 5.1 knots; rowing 5.0 NM in 1 
hr 55 min for an average of 2.6 knots in a light wind and 
a 1-metre swell for approximately 2 NM; sailing 3 hrs 44 
min over 21.8 NM for an average of 5.8 knots.
Average speed under oar during voyage: 
2.94 knots into a 15–20 knot headwind and seas to 1 
metre in height.
Average speed under sail during voyage: 
5.8 knots in winds of 7–15 knots for about 2 hrs, and then 
in winds of 15 to 20 knots for almost two hours.
Trials days 11–12: (1–2/8/92): Rest days
Trials day 13: (3/8/92): 
One continuous hour of rowing ‘firm’ at an average of 5.77 
knots with a peak of 7.2 knots after 45 minutes; outing 
maximum of 7.4 knots during 1 min of firm conducted 
after the hour of firm; hogging measured at 9 cm to 
starboard and 13 cm to port.
Trials day 14: (4/8/92): 
Outing maximum of 6.6 knots in a series of three 10-
minute pieces averaging 5.3 knots at rating 34, 6.0 knots 
at rating 38, 5.5 knots at rating 39.5; max speed in tests 
of backing down of 5.3 knots with all three levels after 
turning around in their seats in 10–15 seconds, with 
rudders held straight.
Trials day 15: (5/8/92) (with 37 empty seats): 
Four ‘staircases’ of 10 strokes at each rating of 38/40/ 
42/44/46/48 (to train the crew for higher ratings) with 
averages of 6.3, 6.7, 5.8 and 6.7 knots; backing down 
exercises with maximums of 2.4 knots with conventional 
rowing astern, and 3.2 knots with the rowers reversed in 
their seats; efforts to scull or row the ship sideways were 
ineffective.
 Inconclusive results were also had in an experiment 
on the effect of unrestricted stroke length by removing 
thalamians and every other rower in the top two levels. 
Surplus zygians and thranites stood in the gangway. The 
results were inconclusive due to sudden wind increases at 
key times, failure to measure or record any actual increase 
in stroke length (if any), and lack of data on wind drift of 
Olympias under various wind speeds and directions with 
which to calculate corrected speeds. It should also be noted 
that zygian stoke length is further restricted at the catch 
in some seats by oar shafts hitting the outrigger brackets, 
even though the latter have been shaved down to reduce 
the problem in some cases.
Trials day 16: (6/8/92): 
T wo speed trials of 2 minutes each, first with both rudders 
down and a maximum of 7.5 knots about an average of 
7.4 knots; then with one rudder hauled out and the other 
half-immersed, which gave a max of 7.9 knots about an 
average of 7.9 knots. T urning tests of 1 minute 3 seconds 
for 180 degrees to port, and a turn to starboard at a full 
knot faster, which was cut short by an emergency stop.
Trials day 17: (7/8/92):
Four outings were cancelled at the discretion of Capt. 
Mavrikis, due to on-shore wind and very close mooring 
of an adjacent cargo ship. This raised questions as to our 
ability to dock safely if wind strength increased to force 6 
(39–49 knots) as forecast. The cancelled outings were the 
morning outing on Thursday, 6th August, both outings on 
Friday, 7th August, and the morning outing on Saturday, 
8th August. The time ashore was spent completing crew 
testing of percentage of body fat, 1 and 6 minute ergometer 
tests, and measurement of optimum stroke length.
Trials day 18: (8/8/92) (with 49 empty seats): 
A five-minute piece with a peak of 6.3 knots and an average 
of 5.9 knots; an 8.2 knot peak at the end of a staircase 
(of ten strokes per step) averaging 7.5 knots. T urning tests 
showed that turns taken with an entire inside stern section 
holding water take 5–10 seconds less but produce drops 
in speed of 2.5 to 2.9 knots, compared to the drop during 
those taken without the inside stern rowers holding water 
of 0.5 to 1 knot.
1.2.5 Sample of the full Log
In the interests of providing readers with the maximum 
detail and some of the flavour of the trials, the 1992 report 
was originally to include the minute-by-minute record 
of each outing or day of the voyage. This proved overly 
ambitious, as it would involve many hours of transcribing 
handwritten notes. Here is one short outing’s notes, to 
give a taste of the material available.
Outing 1: AM Wednesday 22/7/92
NB: ‘easy’ means ‘stop rowing.’
Summary: very first outing, rowing with different bireme 
===== PAGE 29 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke16
configurations, and then whole ship; did one 20 minute 
piece, one 31 minute piece, and one 27 minute piece, 
sail assisted.
At pier 2 × single stroke, 2 × 5 strokes; wind negligible
08:01 cast off; five strokes (to clear the buoy), then into 
continuous row; total distance covered 0.91 NM, 
speed 2.0 knots up to 4.0 knots maximum; easy at 
08:21
08:24 thalamians only, speed approximately 2.5 knots; easy 
at 08:27; total distance covered 1.02 NM
08:34 thalamians and thranites only, speed 3.2 knots after 
1 minute, 3.7 knots after 2 minutes, 4.1 knots after 
3 minutes; noticeable improvement when crew 
counting.
08:39 at distance of 1.49 NM, near the channel, moving 
turn of 180 degrees in 1 minute
08.42 back to speed of 3.7 knots, rating higher; easy at 
08:44; rest
08:55 zygians and thalamians, speed 2.9–3.1 knots at 1 
minute, 
08:59 easy
09:02 same rowers, speed 2.7 knots after 1 minute, 3.5 
knots at 3 minutes
09:06 easy
09:12 all levels row on, speed 4.4 knots after 1 minute, 
4.8 knots maximum
09:18 turn; wind now approximately 10 knots, near head
09:24 speed 3.9 knots at 12 minutes 
09:27 speed 3.4 at 15 minutes, 
09:28 1/2 power, 4.2 knots at 16 minutes, 
09:31 speed 3.7 at 19 minutes
09:32 easy and rest
09:41 all row on light, speed 3.4 knots at 2 minutes; some 
wash
09:46 ½ power
09:48 20 strokes at ¾ power, maximum speed 4.8 knots, 
back to 4.3 knots at ½ power
09:51 20 strokes at ¾ power, range of speeds 5.1–5.8 knots, 
back to ½ power
09:53 at light by the channel, steady at 4.6 knots, 90 degree 
turn into the channel, wind about 20 knots head
09:59 ¾ pressure, speed 4.9 knots, then back to 4.0 knots, 
and steady at 3.8 knots
10:06 wash; speed then back to 4.3 knots on counting
10:11 turn
10:12 easy
10:14 foresail set
10:20 mainsail set; wind now dropped, no progress by 
10:27
10:29 row on light, speed 3.9 knots at 2 minute; large 
swells through channel; speed 4.4 knots steady
10:44 through strait and start turn; speed up to 5.8 knots 
on counts, maximum 6 knots
10:46 sails filling, wind astern
10:48 turn ends
10:51 mainsail braced round to starboard
10:54 speed up to 5.8–6.5 knots on counting
10:55 20 strokes firm, speed 5.6–6.6 knots peak
10:56 emergency stop
11:05 rowers back into seats
11:09 row on
11:11 speed 4.0–4.2 knots
11:13 speed 5.2–5.4 knots on counting
11:14 mainsail up
11:16 easy
11:18 thalamian blades in
11:22 paddle on, top 2 levels, speed 2.6, knots peak of 3.2 
knots
11:24 easy
11:31 tie up; total distance covered 7.8 NM
Bibliography
Coates, J. S., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988. Report on the Anglo Hellenic Sea Trials  of 
Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Lowry, I. J. and Squire. T. M. (1988)  Trireme Olympias 
Extended Sea Trials, Poros, 1988 . Cardiff, Maritime 
Dynamics Ltd/Dept. of Maritime Studies, Cardiff 
University (unpublished)
Morrison, J. S and Coates, J. F . (eds) (1989) An Athenian T rireme 
Reconstructed. The British Sea Trials of Olympias, 1987 . 
BAR International Series 486. Oxford, Archaeopress.
Shaw, J. T. (ed.) (1993) The Trireme Project. Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.  Oxbow Monograph 
31. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Trimble “Ensign” equipment literature and personal 
communication between Charles Hirschler and the 
manufacturer
1.3. T raining, section leading and crew 
leadership 1990 and 1992 sea trials
Paul Lipke
Previous publications have presented observations of 
Olympias’ rowing masters. Here is the perspective of a 
member of the trial’s ‘middle management’, the six section 
leaders, each of whom coaches a team of about 28 rowers. 
This chapter was originally written as an internal document; 
to give the reader the flavour of the project; only minimal 
changes have been made for a broader readership.
1.3.1 Crew management, training and control 
In examining the experience of the T rireme Project as it 
relates to crew command and control in classical times, 
it is essential to bear in mind some important differences 
between ancient and modern practice. Classical triremes 
had a petty officer, a keleustes, who was in charge of the 
crew under oar. The keleustes was assisted by the bow 
officer, the prorates, and at least at times, by the piper, the 
auletes. By contrast, this project has divided the ancient role 
of the keleustes between a rowing master and six section 
leaders. As a result, in order to derive from our work any 
comprehensive picture of the role of the keleustes in ancient 
times, the work of both the rowing masters and section 
leaders must be considered.
 The project has painfully acquired a body of knowledge 
===== PAGE 30 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 17
which has enabled us to characterize what makes a good 
keleustes. It is probably fair to say the technical knowledge 
and skills needed to coach in Olympias are likely to be 
very similar to those needed by the keleustes of an ancient 
trireme: rowing terminology, commands and theory, body 
mechanics, human physical capacity, battle manoeuvres, etc. 
 The crew management skills might be somewhat 
different due to substantial and unknowable changes in 
the psychology of individuals and groups between modern 
volunteer oarsmen and ancient navies under threat of war. 
Surprisingly, experience as a coach of eight-oared racing 
shells or individual athletes does not necessarily constitute 
good training to be a coach in Olympias. The former tends 
toward autocracy, the other shows too much for concern 
for individual rowers. 
 For modern volunteer trireme crews, the ideal keleustes 
would probably be:
i)  an experienced rower (sliding and fixed seat) with superb 
timing
ii) a ‘servant leader’ with acute powers of observation,
iii)  have an excellent sense of humour, including laughing 
at one’s self
iv)  have multi-cultural training, 
v)  have a penchant for consensus and 
vi)  have the willingness to jump into anyone’s seat in order to 
understand what is happening from their point of view.
The rate at which a trireme crew becomes capable of 
meaningful performance as well as the absolute level of 
performance reached may be as much a function of the 
experience of the rowing masters and section leaders as 
it is the qualities of the crew and the ship. The 1990 and 
1992 crews produced statistically identical power, when 
it was measured collectively by the ship’s performance or 
totaled from ergometer test results of every crew member. 
Yet with apparent ease, the 1992 crew averaged nearly 
six knots in their first piece of rowing ‘firm’ during their 
very first row in Olympias. By comparison, the 1990 crew 
took three outings and more visible effort to reach this 
same speed. 
 Since the ship’s condition and the percentage of crew 
members with previous experience were essentially the 
same between years (as was power output) the difference 
can only be explained by the improvements in crew training 
and leadership. As it happened, the 1992 trials enjoyed 
unusually strong unanimity of technique and philosophy 
among the section leaders, rowing and trials management. 
It was also the first year the T rireme T rust (UK) followed 
the T rireme T rust USA’s example and built a training 
mock-up for training its portion of the crew.
1.3.2 The training camps
Many publications have discussed the primary importance 
of oarcrew recruitment and training to the success of 
classical navies. In particular it is clear that Athenian 
supremacy at sea was largely the result of constant training 
(Thucydides 1.142.6–9). Diodorus (13.39.3) says that 
in preparation for meeting the Athenian fleet in battle, 
Mindarus spent five days “carrying out manoeuveres and 
training his men.” 
 At the instigation of rowing master Ford Weiskittel, 
beginning in 1988, the T rireme T rust USA began operating 
training camps for the 90 or so North American rowers 
the weekend of departure for Greece. In 1990, nearly half 
the crew had attended such a training camp, in 1992 there 
were 54 North American participants. These 2–3 day, 
intensive programs included:
i)  fixed seat rowing racing in 30’ lifeboats
ii)  training in a specially designed and built training mock-
up 
iii)  crew physiological testing
iv)  evening briefings with training videos, common meals 
and team-building exercises. 
During the latter, the cooperative, international nature 
of the enterprise was stressed, as was the need to work 
within the inevitable personal and national differences 
in style and commitment. Future training camps should 
get experienced fixed seat rowers into sliding-seat 4- or 
8=oared racing shells in order to reduce their long layback, 
and improve their timing and finesse. 
 The training camps have provided insights into crew 
effectiveness that may be relevant to trireme operations 
in classical times, and in general stress the importance 
of shared mental models, rich contextualization and 
nourishment of a rowing ‘culture’ to optimizing oarcrew 
effectiveness. Those insights include:
i)  Such structured, intensive programmes enable non-rowers 
to learn a surprising amount of the basics and greatly 
accelerate their learning curve. Many training camp 
veterans have said they would not want to row Olympias 
without having had that preparation. Such a time period 
might be just as important to classical men from farming 
or other pursuits who for a variety of reasons might find 
themselves in oared warships.
ii)  Under such a structured setting, the crew begins to form 
a cohesive whole. In fact, in 1992 while there were only 
54 North Americans in the crew, several English rowers 
remarked that they thought there were more than 100 
because of the Americans’ and Canadians’ skill, unity, 
and confidence.
iii)  We have no record of on-board duties of the classical-age 
trireme recruiting officer, the pentekontarchos (‘captain of 
fifty’) (Morrison and Williams 1968, 268), though they 
are listed as one of those who “save the city.” Perhaps 
their role, in keeping with their recruiting duties and 
importance, was as a morale officer and a roaming crew 
trainer and troubleshooter.
1.3.3 Positive lessons learned in 1992
Contrary to previous trials, the rowing masters and section 
leaders reached consensus in advance as to the basic 
components of the stroke, and subsequently taught the 
same stroke throughout the ship. Problems were addressed 
in debriefings following virtually every outing. Careful 
===== PAGE 31 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke18
observation of crew problems and brainstorming by rowing 
masters and section leaders helped enormously.
 The coaches were generally more active in addressing 
problems with seating, personality and technique. Most 
section leaders actively sought to defuse difficult situations, 
working closely and confidentially in crew assignments. 
The importance and effectiveness of these efforts in 
turning any disruptive individuals or those with particular 
problems in technique into contributing rowers cannot be 
overstated.
 Section leaders and rowing masters can help rowers 
enormously if they speak in time with the stroke whenever 
possible, even when giving general information. Numerous 
voices of encouragement were heard when this was 
done. 
1.3.4 Increasing stroke length
Stroke length averaged 82–85 cm throughout the ship, 
a vast improvement over averages of 75 to 77 cm the 
author observed in much of the crew in 1988. T wo triads 
(port 6 and 7) consistently reached 100 cm or more! The 
author never had the time to measure the equipment at 
these positions, but believes this large range resulted from 
fractional differences in oarport size, seat/thole positions 
and a serendipitous collection of properly sized rowers. 
These positions might be worth studying in detail in future 
trials. In many cases triads were prevented from extending 
their average further not so much by the thalamian beams 
as by human backs being in the way and/or zygian oars 
hitting the oarports or outrigger brackets at the catch. 
 When rowing space was limited by the back of the 
person immediately sternward, it could often be increased 
through careful adjustment of the foot stretchers of the 
three or four rowers immediately towards the stern. The 
problem could often be traced to a rower sitting in an 
‘unfamiliar’ seat two or three slots down who had not 
bothered to adjust the stretcher, particularly if this rower 
was of noticeably different stature than the slot’s regular 
occupant. If the limits of stretcher adjustment were 
reached, the rower could be told to sit further forward 
or aft on the seat. Similarly, if a rower was generally too 
long-legged or deep in the chest for the ship, the ‘damage’ 
to stroke length and rowing comfort could be minimized 
if the slots immediately either side of this person were 
filled with smaller-than-average rowers. 
 Many zygian rowers found their stroke limited by their 
oarshaft hitting the oarport and stretcher rail. The problem 
is related to where a rower sits relative to his or her ‘room.’ 
To date, rowers have been left to sit as they please, with 
the result that some rowers sit relatively far back, giving 
themselves more comfort in greater extension at the catch. 
Others sit farther forward in order to give those behind 
them more room. The author has not yet had the time to 
explore where within the ‘room’ the optimum position 
is, but suspects there is an optimum location, and that 
greater consistency throughout the ship might help iron 
out some stroke length, comfort and power limitations. In 
any case the matter deserves attention in any future trials 
and in the design of Mark II.
1.3.5 Some negative lessons learned in 1992
The section leaders were encouraged to row as much as the 
seating plan allowed. While this had many benefits, in some 
cases section leaders virtually joined the ranks of oarsmen 
without setting up substitute coaches, so that sections were 
left without effective leadership. This, combined with slack 
coaching during the long voyages, meant:
 i)  technique leveled-off at best  instead of being 
continually made more consistent and refined
 ii)  on average, rowers got sloppy; 
 iii)  complaints took longer to be addressed, and morale 
generally dipped. More than 10 members of various 
teams complained about ‘disappearing’ coaches.
Future trials can correct this and increase the number 
of people with experience of coaching in Olympias by 
assigning assistant section leaders. In the smaller port and 
starboard sections forward of the boatmast, one coach 
and an assistant are probably all that are needed to cover 
both sides after the first week. The extra section leader and 
assistant could then move aft to help other sections.
 The workload on the rowing masters (and the possibility 
of having to try and run a set of trials without an 
experienced rowing master) should be reduced by having 
more people trained in this position. It is a significant 
failing that to my knowledge the experienced rowing 
masters have not written up in detail the process and 
techniques used to ‘master’ the ship. From observation 
and their vociferous comments, it is apparent there is a 
lot to this process!
 The author considers it remarkable (and does not wish 
to push the odds) that the project has had so few injuries to 
date, especially given that rowers are not required to stretch 
and warm up properly before each outing. There should 
be organized stretching sessions before each outing. The 
Chief Medical Officer should probably not have regular 
rowing duties (though some who have filled that slot would 
doubtless refuse to participate in the trials at all if this were 
enforced), and should double as a safety officer.
1.3.6 Minimizing delays
Section leaders and their teams need to learn to be flexible 
in rowing with some triads out of action, even temporarily. 
Valuable time was wasted with the entire ship waiting for 
one or two rowers with equipment or other delays. 
 In many cases, the triads in the immediate vicinity of 
the problem can wait or row short ‘air shots’ ( i.e. going 
through the motions of rowing a very short stroke with the 
blade in the air so as to maintain pacing and keep the torso 
out of the way of the next rower towards the bow) until 
the problem is solved, then fall in and complete the piece. 
Section leaders need to have a sense of how long repairs, 
etc. should take if they are to make spot decisions. 
===== PAGE 32 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 19
 Rather than have only “ready” or “not ready” as possible 
responses to the command query, “Are you ready?” (to 
start rowing), a third option such as, “two out and ready” 
(meaning two triads out, but otherwise go ahead) would 
effectively both reduce the waste and apprise the rowing 
masters of the situation. It is hard to believe that as a 
practical matter the classical Athenians would wait for 
every last seat to be ready when they were rowing day in 
and day out.
 If team leaders managed their own rotations, spares 
and the filling of empty seats, the rowing masters would 
not have to stay up late at night handling such details, 
and the crew management would be more attuned to the 
particulars of the situation. 
 For example, two rowers of the same triad fell asleep on 
the beach one night and came in to the Hellenic Navy base 
where the training camp was held at 4:55 a.m. (they were 
neither drunk nor amorously entangled!). They made an 
effort to get up on time and row hard that same morning, 
but the rowing masters, not knowing their effort and seeing 
the hour at which they came on base, rotated this triad 
out the following day as part of the standard disciplinary 
procedures. By contrast, two members of another triad 
spent the entire night drinking, came in at 0700, failed 
to show up to row that morning, and got off without any 
discipline what so ever. To say the first pair were angry is 
an understatement. 
1.3.7 Points on section leading
Some section leaders held a quick debriefing with their 
team after every outing: addressing questions, reviewing 
progress, hearing complaints/suggestions and generally 
making themselves available. As a section leader, the 
author found the comments voiced at these sessions 
extremely productive and helpful. This author recommends 
the rowing masters, trials officer etc. make a practice of 
attending these debriefings on a rotating basis; it is a ready 
source of ideas and observations.
 Crew members from teams who did not have leaders 
following this practice complained on occasion, or 
addressed section leaders from other parts of the ship asking 
them to communicate certain points to their section. This 
particular section leader was then in an awkward position 
as to whether to talk with the section or transmit the 
request to the proper section leader. Holding such meetings 
should be a requirement of all section leaders; if there are 
no issues to address on a given day, the meeting can be 
immediately adjourned.
 New section leaders should be instructed that it is not 
always easy to properly interpret what you can see from 
the gangway, i.e. the actions of the oar handles, in a way 
that always corrects problems with what is happening to 
the blades in the water. From the gangway, you cannot 
see the blades in the water. If you climb up on the canopy 
to observe the blades of a triad that was having difficulty, 
you disappear and become less accessible to other rowers 
in the section. From atop the canopy the section leader 
cannot see the thalamians or zygians in the triads with the 
problem, nor can you communicate easily with anyone 
but a thranite. 
 The only place a section leader can observe both the 
blades in the water and all the rowers guiding them is 
from a crouching position on the outrigger. From this 
position there is the risk of falling into the forest of moving 
oar shafts. While in this position, you must also avoid 
cramping the stroke of any adjacent thranites. Even from 
such a spot, communication with a zygian or thalamian 
usually meant relaying instructions through the thranite 
of the triad. While this author never felt endangered while 
crouched on the outrigger, it would be wise in Mark II 
to install a rail or line at the canopy edge which section 
leaders can use to attached a short safety line and snap 
ring when they need to be out on the outrigger.
1.3.8 Rowing in the bow
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that the use of the 
bow as ‘the place for poor rowers’ is counterproductive. 
If anything, the bow should have some of the strongest 
oarsmen. First and foremost, the bow has the only ‘clean’ 
water in the ship and therefore has the potential of 
providing the most power as rated by seat. Rowers from 
the middle and stern sections (including section leader 
and one-time rowing master Corny Foster) observed upon 
moving forward that rowing in the bow was more work. 
Several said they could apply more power, or the same 
power through a greater part of the stroke. They perceived 
the difference as reduced slip and/or reduced tendency of 
the oar blade to be carried quickly aft (before they could 
apply power) by the slipstream.
 The absence of zygians and/or thalamian beams in 
the very bow means the first six rowers can have longer, 
less restricted strokes than any rowers except those in the 
sternmost positions. Powerful rowers could be very effective 
in these seats. 
 The bow is isolated from the stern (
i.e. command) 
by distance and the obstructing masts. A rowing master 
should be aware that what is happening in the stern 
sections immediately in front of him/her may not be 
indicative of what is happening (or the effort being made 
or effectiveness) in the bow. Negative statements and 
practices serve to further isolate the bow and reduce its 
effectiveness.
 T ests should be conducted to assess the effectiveness 
of these positions and the applicability of the racing eight 
‘engine room’ theory by swapping sections. Such tests 
should be conducted before rowers have developed too 
strong an affinity for a particular seat or part of the ship.
 The bow T riad 1 and 2 thalamians were allowed to 
develop longer strokes and their own rotations. They 
also had their own emergency escape procedures in the 
absence of an escape hatch. Bow-triad 1 thalamians had 
to slowly and carefully climb forward over gear, oar shafts 
===== PAGE 33 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke20
and the hypozoma (the ship’s steel cable hogging truss) in 
order to reach the slot at the very end of the gangway. 
The T riad 3 and T riad 4 port and starboard thalamians 
taught their zygians to vacate quickly and climbed out 
(with difficulty) through their slot. Following a swamping 
(however unlikely) a simple length of pipe or hose with a 
mouthpiece could save the lives of these rowers. 
 In general, the foredeck needs to be stronger. It needs to 
be stronger to handle the impact of crew members handling 
lines and jumping down to it from the canopy, as often 
happened. It also needs to be re-designed to give zygians 
and thalamians more air and elbow room, and if thalamians 
are still underneath it, should have an escape hatch.
 In general the bow thalamians are very short of good 
air. One actually fell asleep at the oar; maintaining 
afterwards that it was exhaustion combined with “the 
inability to get a decent lung-full of air”. Karl Anderson 
(port T riad 1 thalamian) wrote, “Water collects in the 
ram bilge and begins to stink. This stink, coupled with 
the fact the ‘bathroom’ is over your head, becomes almost 
overpowering at times.” 
 Future trials involving long outings should have a 
portable toilet, proper bucket with a seat, or other sturdy 
equipment. Long waits and crowding of the foredeck 
should be eliminated by the use of a second, stern head 
with whatever curtaining may be necessary to address the 
sensitivities of rowers and Hellenic Navy personnel. 
 Because of the ship’s reduced beam in the bow, in 
the bow-most thalamian positions it is necessary when 
shipping oars to cross the shafts (rather than sliding them 
in parallel) and secure the handles close to the exterior of 
the framing around the opposite askoma (the leather sleeve 
that keeps out seawater). If the grip is positioned within 
the frame it will push the askoma inside out.
 During tight power turns the T riad 1 and T riad 2 
thalamians on the inside of the turn found it impossible 
to hold water without crabbing, as the bow tends to be 
driven under slightly. To quote Karl Anderson again:
 “My contention is that the first four [thalamian] 
positions must have good one-minute erg scores. What 
matters is spirit and strength. You must be able to power 
out of a crab by yourself. [There is no zygian for these seats 
and the thranite is too far up to help unless he has very 
long legs – PL] You must have the strength and ability 
to wait until one of the other thalamians in the ram can 
strike their oar and come help you... People ‘in the ram’ 
need to like rowing in rough water...you get tossed and 
turned. When wakes [or swells] approach the ram, the 
bow-most thranites should track their progress, alerting 
the thalamians. Before the wake hits, these thalamians 
shorten their strokes, then sky their blades gently through 
the return. Then you gradually lengthen out.” 
 In future experiments with tight, fast manoeuvring, 
the author recommends we experiment with reducing the 
number of inside rowers holding water to the absolute 
minimum. Similarly, using the minimum number of 
rowers in the stern  to hold water and/or experimenting 
with having just the outside bow drive the ship around 
may prove productive. 
1.3.9 Miscellaneous
The 1992 voyage was clearly a valuable exercise. But the 
planned 7 days was too long considering the overall trials 
period. Even the actual length of 5 days was nearly too 
much for the crew in light of the overall conditions and 
the fact that we needed maximum power and productivity 
for speed trials after the return. In the future, the author 
believes long day trips or perhaps a voyage of two days and 
a night could accomplish as much. In any case, the rationale 
for undertaking the voyage was not consistently applied. 
 The author believes two outings a day are very effective 
during the initial trials period (the first week), but after 
that most days should consist of one longer outing. Such a 
flexible system would reduce cumulative fatigue, improve 
crew morale (via more rest) and make higher-level training 
more effective. Towards the end of the trials period we 
often had to cut short a good outing when technique and 
morale were still building in order to “save energy for the 
afternoon.” Given the time it takes to get the crew aboard, 
fill the empty slots, etc., one outing will impose less ‘hurry 
up and wait’ on the crew.
 Tightening and adjusting of gear was better than in 
previous trials, but was still not in keeping with what 
would most probably have been required in classical 
times. Future training camps and briefings should include 
demonstrations and hands-on practice in foot stretcher 
and thole-strap adjustment, lacing and repairs.
 The 1990 repair crew was not aggressively managed 
initially, as it needs to be, with the result that management 
had trouble making certain decisions due to lack of 
information, and maintenance work fell behind. Even 
when well in hand, the lack of repair crew management 
in 1990 put an unreasonable burden on two individuals, 
namely Tony Canavarro and Tom Anderson. It is not 
enough for the head of the repair crew to undertake work 
himself, he (or she) needs to orchestrate, communicate and 
anticipate (this problem was actively corrected in 1992).
 Given the considerable challenges we have experienced 
in communicating with the crew, future trials should 
attempt to determine how well the ship can operate (after 
the initial training period) without electronic equipment. 
A system of whistle signals and ancient Greek commands 
could be designed and tested, the material being sent out 
to rowers with their letters of acceptance so they have time 
to memorize them.
Bibliography
Coates, J. S., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988. Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea Trials  of 
Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Morrison, J. S and Coates, J. F . (eds) (1989) An Athenian T rireme 
Reconstructed. The British Sea Trials of Olympias, 1987 . 
BAR International Series 486. Oxford, Archaeopress.
===== PAGE 34 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 21
Morrison, J. S. and Willimans, R. T . (1968) Greek Oared Ships 
900-–322 B.C. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Shaw, J. T. (ed.) (1993) The Trireme Project. Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.  Oxbow Monograph 
31. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
1.4. Olympias 1992–3 repairs  
and modifications, with lessons  
for future reconstructions
John Howarth, Paul Lipke and Meph Wyeth
The development of the trireme and the pentecontor upon 
which it was based probably took hundreds of years and 
involved the construction and modification of hundreds 
of vessels. In each of these ‘models,’ new ideas could be 
tested. Furthermore, in aspects other than hull shape, 
wooden vessels are easily modified, so a single vessel’s life 
typically encompasses various arrangements. Even hull 
shape can be modified if the need is strong enough. The 
T rireme Project is attempting to compress the learning 
curve of ancient shipwrights into a relatively short period 
of time, and in a single vessel. Because of this, the repair 
crew is vital not only to the operation of the ship, but 
to the collection of data and observations relevant to the 
design and operation of an improved reconstruction. 
  The repair and modifications crew also feels compelled 
to point out that Olympias’ naval architect, John Coates, 
had the daunting challenge of designing a safe vessel 
which will not endanger any of the roughly 200 people 
on board, and whose life span will justify the considerable 
expense and prestige invested by the Greek government. 
Furthermore, the Hellenic Navy has to consider the 
ship’s symbolic importance, any long term logistical 
complications, and the very limited funds available for 
Olympias whenever either of the T rireme T rusts wants to 
undertake some modification to further test our ideas. 
  Such a context must unfortunately discourage 
innovation and radical ideas to some degree. It places 
a valuable premium on a conservative, safe design, and 
discourages the sort of design risk-taking that undoubtedly 
lies behind the success of the triremes of the classical age. 
We publicly thank John for his unwavering attention to 
issues of safety and ship longevity.
  Starting from the first sea trials in 1987, wear patterns 
and equipment problems have been one of the main sources 
of information as to where the design of Olympias needs 
to be modified. As Olympias entered her fourth season of 
sea trials, the passage of time and more ambitious rowing 
began to uncover defects in the rowing furniture which 
had not been apparent previously, or had not become 
problematic.
  To get the ship in order during the first week, the repair 
crew averaged about 18 man-hours a day, each day, not 
counting oar modifications. T wo man-days were spent 
unlacing the askomata, greasing them to get them limber, 
and then lacing them up again. Other work included 
making and tying leather thole straps, grommets and thole 
ropes, installing oars in their proper places, installing the 
sound system, and fixing furniture. Rowers greased their 
own oars and leathers, taking just a few seconds as needed 
during the outings. 
  Grease is effective only if used in moderation. In their 
zeal to keep oarstraps well-lubricated, a few rowers applied 
too much, too often. Consequently, grease sometimes 
found its way onto places where it did more harm than 
good, such as oar handles.
  Throughout the trials, John Howarth and Meph Wyeth 
each worked 6–7 hours a day (over and above their rowing) 
to keep the ship operational and the experiments running. 
Longer outings, such as those undertaken on the voyage, 
sometimes required longer repair sessions. 
  Individual responsibility for the maintenance of rowing 
equipment was heavily emphasized this year, and contrary 
to previous experience, we were successful in training 
many rowers to care for their equipment. One indication 
of the success was the way foot stretchers were properly 
adjusted and tightened throughout the ship, sometimes 
even during rotations of rowers within triads. Rowers 
learned they could adjust their foot stretcher in less than 
60 seconds. Many rowers also learned the best way to get 
their gear fixed was to show up for repair crew and do it 
themselves.
1.4.1 Maintenance
John Howarth writes: “I took over the maintenance of 
Olympias  because Paul Lipke was overwhelmed with 
work in the first two days. I was continually engaged in 
emergency repairs and never got ahead. This meant there 
was no time to fully examine the ship or do preventative 
maintenance. This report, therefore, is based on what 
emergency repairs were undertaken and on general 
observations. I (Howarth) cannot say whether the initial 
crew training, voyage or speed trials caused more damage 
to the ship.
  The hull and main timbers received no repair work; 
they appear to be in excellent condition and there are 
no obvious problems to anticipate. The only suggested 
work is the caulking of the seams immediately above the 
waterline, since the water that came in these dried-out 
seams when the ship first heeled over under sail in 1992 
caused enough concern for the captain to order sail to be 
substantially reduced. 
  In 1993, after 
Olympias was freighted to England, three 
small leaks appeared at the following locations: below port 
zygian no. 7, below port thalamian no. 10, and below port 
zygian no. 15, in the fourth plank below the waterline, 
the latter being the largest leak, but by no means serious. 
They appeared to come from around the large clench 
nails, driven through dowels, that hold the planking to the 
futtock. It is possible that part of the dowel has cracked 
and come away. If this conjecture proves correct upon 
inspection after the ship is hauled out, removal of the 
nail, replacement of the dowel and refastening is straight 
===== PAGE 35 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke22
forward, and does not indicate any serious problems in 
the hull as a whole.
  Douglas Lindsay reported that the sail needed some 
repair.
  The decks, gangway and internal structure are in good 
condition except for the following:
i) The storage rack is designed so that downward pressure, 
from stored equipment and the crew pulling down on it 
as they move about, pulls the nails out. It was refastened 
but it needs redesigning. A net would do just as well, 
would be lighter and less prone to break.
ii) The seats break because people stand on their unsupported 
edges when climbing to and from the gangway. They 
are badly designed, and ideally should be completely 
dismantled in order to repair and replace them. Use 
of a stronger species, mortise-and-tenon or doweled 
joints, and additional framing (if it can be added 
without interfering with the rowing) are three possible 
improvements.
iii) The zygian stretcher rails tend to split at their stern 
ends because a) they tend to be stood on more than 
the stretcher rails of other positions, and b) a weak and 
unalterable type of joint is used. A beveled notch cut 
into the zygian beam to hold the stretcher rail’s full 
depth would provide support without relying solely on 
the weak connection made by the fastening. The easiest, 
unauthentic reinforcement would appear to be to drill 
and drive a glued dowel into the stretcher about 2 inches 
from the end in order to strengthen it across the grain 
against the frequent downward loading.
iv) This is the first year that significant problems with foot 
stretchers have appeared. The coaching and training of 
crews in rowing Olympias has finally reached a stage 
where the process and personnel have become good 
enough that the rowers are able, within the short period 
of the sea trials, to learn to apply very substantial leg 
drive. This stresses the equipment more than has been 
possible in previous years. Much of the ‘breakage’ 
consisted of tired old stretcher ropes breaking, and leather 
clogs and adjustment pins working loose.
  The foot stretcher woodwork displayed some 
problems, usually because joints worked loose. They 
were replaced with spares. Extra adjusting holes were 
drilled in the foot stretcher bar for about six, very short 
legged thalamians. 
  The foot stretchers appear to be a very complicated 
piece of construction, but the author confesses he cannot 
think of a better one. Since 1987, almost every rower, 
coach or observer, including John Coates, has tried hard 
to find simpler, better solution to the problem of where 
and how rowers feet will be braced. It is difficult to 
arrange so that the legs of the thranites do not interfere 
with the loom of the zygian’s oar during the stroke, and 
harder still to find a simple way the stretchers can be 
adjustable. Of the hundreds of participants, not one has 
yet claimed to have found an equal, let alone a better 
solution than that designed for Olympias. The only place 
where some options exist is in the thalamian seats.
v) The thranite stretcher rails presented one of the two major 
repair problems on the ship, the other being the oars. 
The design of the thranite furniture has to allow for 
the operation of the zygian oar underneath the thranite 
stretcher rail. At present the configuration is not strong 
enough, and the forces have been distributed in such a 
way that they force joints open, not shut. This is a major 
weakness and led to the loosening of many of these joints. 
This can (and did) lead to a domino succession of failures 
within the thranite file (see below).
 The design of the thranite furniture is such that the 
thrust generated through the feet of the rower is delivered 
through the stretcher to the crossbar, seat upright and 
seat (Figs 1.4.1 and 1.4.2). These connections are laid 
out in such a way that they rely mostly (if not solely) on 
the strength of the connection between the wood and the 
copper fastenings, as opposed to relying on wood resisting 
wood by means of joinery. 
 More specifically, in Figures 1.4.1 and 1.4.2, the reader 
can ‘see’ how thrust is delivered through the rail ‘A’ into 
the upper end of the seat upright ‘C’ (to the right in the 
figures). These two members are joined by nailing through 
the seat upright ‘C’ into the end grain of the stretcher rail 
‘A.’ Nails driven into end grain have very poor holding 
power and so tend to work loose. Also, since the nails are 
located near the thin, upper end of the seat upright ‘C,’ 
they tend to split the support open. As the joint becomes 
loose, the problem gets worse. 
 Thrust is also transmitted to the cross bar ‘B,’ which 
is only nailed to the seat upright. The thrust from the 
rail ‘A’ tends to drive the seat upright ‘C’ away from 
the crossbar, loosening the joint. From the crossbar ‘B’ 
the thrust is transmitted to the next stretcher rail ‘D.’ 
However, because of the need to leave room for the foot 
stretcher, stretcher rail ‘D’ only overlaps cross rail ‘B’ by 
a small amount. Thus, the nail securing it is located very 
near the end of rail ‘D,’ and is driven downwards and at 
an angle. It is a very weak connection that cannot resist 
the force generated by the rowers.
 Rowers often generate unequal pressure between the 
right and left pads of their foot stretcher, and the resulting 
unequal moments cause the stretcher rail to rotate. [This 
rotation makes the fastening connecting the end of the rail 
with the crossbar load the crossbar in compression parallel to 
grain, a direction in which wood is quite strong. Olympias’ 
Douglas fir averages 5,850 pounds per square inch (psi) 
for proportional limit compression strength parallel to 
grain. By contrast, the twisting of the rail against the 
fastening loads the rail in tension perpendicular to grain, 
the direction in which wood is weakest (in this case an 
average of 340. psi for Douglas fir) – PL]. As a result, the 
rail splits around the nail. This is very difficult to repair. 
 Lastly, thrust is transmitted to the hull through a weak 
connection between the raised seat and the gunwale.
 The seat configuration cannot transmit all the force from 
each rower directly to the hull, so that a portion of the force 
is transmitted through the crossbar to the next stretcher 
sternwards, and so on down the ship. This domino effect 
on the seats further aft was clearly demonstrated when the 
===== PAGE 36 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 23
cross rail of starboard thranite seat no. 5 collapsed and the 
three seats immediately towards the bow went down with it.
 Ideally the joint should have stretcher rail ‘A’ pushing 
directly against crossbar ‘B’ which in turn pushes against 
stretcher rail ‘D.’ The seat should then be located directly 
on top of, and clench fastened to, each member, greatly 
stiffening the whole thing. This way the joints tend to close 
themselves and the force is taken more by the wood, not 
the copper rivets and nails (see Fig. 1.4.3).
 Since we cannot reconfigure 
Olympias, a less expensive 
solution is drawn in Figure 1.4.4. 
 a)  put a dowel protruding down from stretcher rail ‘A’ 
to transmit the thrust directly into crossbar ‘B’ and 
prevent support ‘C’ from splitting. This may involve 
cutting a notch in the foot stretcher.
 b)  connect crossbar ‘B’ and stretcher rail ‘D’ with a 
dowel to transmit the thrust from ‘B’ to ‘D’ (see 
below)
 c)  put a block on top of stretcher rail ‘D’ to stiffen it, 
either between the seat, the gunwale and the top of 
‘D,’ or onto the stern face of crossbar ‘B’ and the 
side of stretcher rail ‘D’ next to the gunwale. Either 
of these would be a tricky, time-consuming job with 
the first being easier if less ‘elegant.’
   The ends of each piece are splitting more and 
more. If they are to survive, they need to be inspected 
and proper remedial work performed.
vi) By far the worst problem in 1992 was with the oars. 
Given that Olympias almost always operates with a crew 
that is largely new to trireme rowing, her oars take a lot of 
abuse in the first two days or so of each new set of sea trials. 
This should not obscure the fact that classical triremes 
would have damaged and broken oars in significant 
numbers when forced to row during storms, during battles 
and when training new crews. Even with a seasoned crew, 
it would be inevitable that rowing long hours each day, as 
ancient crews did, they would wear oars out.
 Thalamian oars are made in one piece and are very 
strong. Even though the thalamians cannot see their blades, 
causing their blades to take a lot of abuse, the strength of 
the design saves them. Apart from minor splits and gouges, 
thalamian oars are usually either sound or broken beyond 
repair. 
 The narrow, ‘protective’ copper strip around the 
thalamian blade that was added in recent years has little 
or no protective effect. In fact, it damages the zygian oars 
and should be removed. Worse still, a prong of a zygian oar 
or a second thalamian oar’s copper strip can get trapped 
under one of these strips, bringing the unfortunate rowers 
involved to a sudden, shocking stop. It can be very difficult 
to disengage these two oars from on board, and on occasion 
we have had to climb into the water or the Hellenic Navy’s 
inflatable chase boat to solve the problem.
 The 42 main thalamian oars and three spares were 
modified to increase the gearing (see below). The twelve 
short thalamian oars positioned in the first three triads at 
the bow and stern were not modified.
 The zygian oars were the hardest hit. The rower cannot 
see the blades and the design is weak. Zygian blades with 
tenons through them have been split by the combined 
radial swelling of the tenon and tangential swelling of 
the blade. Where they are not split, compression set has 
loosened some of the tenons in their mortises so that they 
are starting to fall out. Those blades which are riveted to 
the shaft without any tenons are in much better shape. 
As mentioned above, the forks are scuffed and split also 
by the thalamian copper bands.
 Once the oar shaft starts to split towards the handle 
(from the crotch between the forks) the only answer is to 
shorten the oar. This converts it to a short zygian blade (of 
which we now have far too many!). Broken forks are not 
really repairable, and many blades need renewing. There 
are many zygian blades with ragged edges and centerline 
splits, since we were forced to use oars which we rejected 
in earlier years as being cracked, weakened, etc. 34 of the 
existing 56 zygian blades are damaged.
Figure 1.4.1. Side view of thranite seat and foot gear, showing 
joinery (Photo: Paul Lipke). 
Figure 1.4.2. View of thranite seat and foot gear, looking 
toward the bow, showing fastenings into end grain and other 
details (Photo: Paul Lipke).
===== PAGE 37 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke24
 The ship should have 54 zygian oars, of which the 
forward six (T riads 1 to 3) are short. However, in practice 
we found that T riad 4 also required a short oar to prevent 
the inboard end from catching on the deck support upright 
at the break in the foredeck. Similar problems appeared 
with certain rowers in stern T riads 28 and 29. 
 Thranite oars suffer from the same weaknesses as the 
zygian blades, except that since the thranites can see what 
they are doing they are much more able to avoid clashing 
with others. As a result, they are in much better shape.
 All the oars are worn at the thole. This did not appear 
to contribute to any broken shafts. Broken shafts seem to 
occur when an oar gets jammed for one reason or another, 
and then water pressure snaps it. When repaired, these 
oars are stiffer and do not bend evenly under pressure, so 
that they simply break at a new weak point. 
 In the future this author (Howarth) recommends:
a)  carrying a full proper set of oars and adequate spares. At 
the end of 1992 trials the existing oars were so weakened 
that we were damaging 12–15 oars per outing. If left 
un-repaired, these oars would have been destroyed.
b)  adding sacrificial leather sheath to protect against chafe 
at the thole and carling.
c)  gluing a piece of neoprene (or similar) over the forks to 
absorb the impact from other blades.
There is no reason, at this point, that replacement oars 
for Olympias should be of the same design as the existing 
ones, as long as the power characteristics are compatible 
with the ancient evidence. New oars should be designed 
assuming we will always have raw crews who will do their 
share of damage. The more the author (Howarth) thinks 
about it, the more he realizes an oar is a sophisticated 
piece of equipment. The author does not have the rowing 
experience or the technical knowledge to design them, 
Figure 1.4.3. Suggested stronger layout of stretcher rails and crossbar, viewed from above.
Figure 1.4.4. Proposed use of dowels to stiffen Olympias rowing furniture rails, upright and crossbrace, viewed from 
inboard.
===== PAGE 38 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 25
but knows they are a maintenance problem that should 
be addressed. Here are my thoughts, to be improved upon 
by someone with the right training and experience:
 Design a standard oar shaft which covers all five types 
of oars, or which can cover them with small modifications, 
such as moving the pivot point by moving a ‘button,’ 
paring down the loom or shortening the shaft. Give the 
blade end of the shaft flat, parallel sides for the length of 
all possible blades. Half blades of each type could then 
be fixed to the shaft with dowels and strong modern 
adhesives (see Fig. 1.4.5). This design has no forks and is 
very strong. The blades are thicker at the center than at 
present because they do not have to fit in between forks. 
They are therefore stronger, although the whole is slightly 
heavier.
 These oars should be easier and cheaper to make. To 
repair them you simply saw off the broken blade and attach 
a new one. There are no metal fittings.
1.4.2 Thalamian oar modifications 
by Paul Lipke
In order for the thalamians to contribute more substantially 
to the ship’s progress at high rates of speed, and to equalize 
their work load relative to other levels, it was necessary 
to increase the gearing of the thalamian oars and/or 
increase the blade area. Due to the one-piece design of the 
thalamian blades, it was not practical with the available 
resources to increase the load by increasing the blade area. 
Thus the only alternative was to move the pivot point of 
the oar closer to the handle. This increase in gearing was 
highly desirable.
 Measurements and photographs taken in 1990 by 
John Coates showed the thalamian oars were operating 
70 mm further inboard than they were designed to do. 
Their handles were too far inboard because of the shape of 
the swelling in the oar loom, and the bevel on the carling 
block supporting the tholepin. John Coates has written in 
a personal communication: 
Timothy [Shaw] and I thought that moving [thalamian 
oars] 100 mm outboard, i.e. 30. mm [further] out 
from their originally intended position, would improve 
thalamian power, observing the relative ease with which 
those blades slipped in the water, and was a change worth 
trying.
Once aboard Olympias in 1992, the 100 mm movement 
outboard proved to be impractical. It would have compelled 
rowers to pull on the oar handle from well off the centreline 
of the body, and then finish the drive with their inside 
hand cramped against their navel.  
 Ford Weiskittel, Boris Rankov, Section Leader David 
Wigg and Paul Lipke each tried to eliminate this cramping 
and achieve the full 100 mm change by ‘rowing through the 
arc.’ This meant rotating the torso to face slightly inboard 
during the second half of the drive so that at the finish the 
thalamian’s head was actually in the corner formed by the 
beam and the zygian foot stretcher. It was just possible to 
do this with limited power application, but we knew it 
would be impractical to teach in the allotted time, might 
lead to injuries, and would likely prove impossible for 
rowers to manage at high power, where the extra length 
was most important. 
 By experimenting with different gearings in several 
thalamian seats, 40 mm was determined to be the 
maximum possible outboard movement without undue 
discomfort or risk to the rowers. This gave us just 10 mm 
movement outboard from John Coates’ original design:
Gearing (with blade centre of pressure assumed to be 
260 mm from tip):
 
As designed     2.82
As observed in 1990     2.57
Moved outboard from 1990 position by 40 mm  2.96
If 100 mm outboard movement had been possible  3.11
In the event, the 40 mm change did noticeably increase the 
work load for the thalamians and tended to increase (very 
slightly) the clearance between the backs of their hands 
and the zygian beams. However, this increase in clearance 
was more than offset by the use of rope thole-straps. The 
rope was much thicker than the leather that was used in 
previous years, and so it raised the pivot point and thereby 
the handle and loom so much that it became necessary 
Figure 1.4.5. A proposed standardized shaft with attachable half-blades.
===== PAGE 39 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke26
to shave off a small portion of the bottom corners of the 
inboard foot plate and cheek piece for every zygian foot 
stretcher.
 More importantly, the thalamian oar no longer tended 
to be rolled off square during the recovery because the thick 
rope thole-strap (sandwiched between the oar shaft and 
the thalamian carling) created full clearance between the 
shoulder of the loom and the inboard bevel of the carling 
block. From the rower’s point of view this was a great 
advantage, far more important than the increase in gearing.
 Using only the simplest of hand tools, a thalamian oar 
modification could be completed in 15–20 minutes, once 
it was pulled up on deck. In order to have Olympias ready 
to put to sea with all the oars modified, we decided to 
commandeer part of the oarcrew for a work detail, much 
as ancient naupegos might have done. Modification of all 
the oars took 84 man hours with 14 people (of uneven 
woodworking skills) using hand tools and the bandsaws in 
the Hellenic Navy’s two Poros carpentry shops; this figure 
includes planning, preparation of templates, modification, 
clean-up, taking oars off the ship and up to the shops, 
replacing them in the ship with tight askomata, etc. The 
short thalamian oars at the ship’s ends were not modified, 
since these rowers were already experiencing slightly 
restricted strokes due to hitting of the angled (relative to 
Olympias’ centerline) oarports at the catch.
 The relocation of the thalamian pivot point increased 
the gearing from 1990 levels by 40 mm, not the 100 mm 
John Coates had desired. The final result was a pivot point 
commonly 1050 mm and occasionally 1060 mm outboard 
of the handle end. This measurement, checked in more 
than 10 places throughout the ship while rowers were 
pulling on the oars, held regardless of the configuration 
of the thole-strap or thole-rope employed.
1.4.3 Oarstraps and grommets
Experiments and difficulties with oarstraps (or thole-straps) 
have been reported by this project before. In 1992 the effort 
to solve the problem continued, with experiments using a 
variety of different configurations made of different types 
of tanned leather, rawhide and rope. 
 Quite probably ancient strap -makers had access to 
a body of leather craft, including such information as 
preferred animals, seasons and methods of slaughter, 
types of cuts etc., that we can at best only partly recover. 
They might also have had the option of inspecting their 
material at all stages of preparation, from pasture through 
to tannery. This author [Meph Wyeth] can imagine them 
laughing to themselves at our bumbling pursuit of what 
they may have considered to be common knowledge. 
 An important question I never even thought to ask 
before is do we know which hide we should be using, 
i.e. sheep, goat, or cow? The project is seeking a tanning/
rawhide expert with a kit of different materials (or identical 
materials with different tanning methods) for further 
experiments.
 Modern athletes do not show much homogeneity of 
opinion about the relative merits of various materials and 
configurations of equipment. The classical Athenians may 
have debated loud and long about the materials, sources, 
manufacture, etc. of their equipment. They may have come 
up with a number of solutions to the problem of how to 
attach an oar to a tholepin. The author knows there are 
any number of ways to lash a Polynesian canoe. All of 
them will keep it together. Some work better in certain 
sea conditions, or with certain crews, but they all work. 
Leather oarstraps
The 1992 trials continued the use of the single-loop leather 
straps of previous years on a few oars, and experimented 
with a double-loop configuration on twelve others. Meph 
Wyeth recorded dimensions for those we manufactured in 
1992 (see Tables 1.4.1 and 1.4.2 below).
 As in earlier trials, there were problems with the leather’s 
tendency to stretch. At least when straps were new this 
necessitated substantial adjustments ( e.g. removing and 
retying the strap) as often as once an hour. 
 To monitor stretch, each strap was measured at 
manufacture, periodically during the trials, and after the 
final row. The material used in 1992 varied in thickness 
from 2.5 to 4 mm, averaging about 3 mm. In previous 
years, oarstrap leather was about 4 mm thick. Whether this 
difference affected the straps’ tendency to stretch is hard to 
say. Other factors, such as cut of hide, tanning methods, 
hide quality, degree of nurture, and the slaughtering 
methods used on the cows whose hides were exploited may 
also have promoted stretch. Of the single-loop straps, the 
longest stretch was l02 mm (from 547 mm to 649 mm), 
and the shortest 60 mm (from 595 mm to 655 mm). Of 
the doubles, all of which began life at 685 mm, stretch 
ranged from 37 mm to 138 mm, averaging about 80 
mm. 
 No pattern for these figures has emerged. Although 
initially the straps were deployed on both sides, at all three 
levels, and from bow to stern in an attempt to determine 
what situations might exert the greatest stress, the results 
show no consistency. Apparently an individual rower’s 
technique, physical strength etc. determine stretch far more 
than does the disposition of a strap within the ship. 
 The ‘double-half ’ strap configuration worked well 
enough for the thalamians, but this may have been due 
to the difficulty of applying full force to a thalamian oar 
handle, the reasons for which are discussed elsewhere 
(see pp. 33–4). The double-half configuration had to be 
avoided in the upper two levels in order to avoid raising 
the pivot point and thereby the rowers’ hands.
 Some crew members found the need for frequent stretch 
adjustment annoying. Some also reported that the constant 
stretching made it difficult for them to control their oars. 
On a positive note, several people found that the leather 
stabilized after stretching considerably for several days. 
How well this very distressed material would last once it 
had reached maximum length is something there was not 
===== PAGE 40 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 27
sufficient time to determine. A longer trial period would 
be needed before research could address such questions 
as: if ancient crews used leather straps, how often would 
they have had to replace them? How many animals of 
what type would a trireme require for a season’s allotment 
of oarstraps?
 Rowers who had double loops said that their oars were 
continually going off-square. Whether this resulted from 
stretch, from the dynamics of double loops, or from some 
combination of the two is hard to determine. On the 
other hand, the double-half leather strap was preferred 
by some to the single twist for its ease of installation. 
Once stretched, leather straps require more time, skill and 
attention to detail to tighten. Some experienced trireme 
rowers preferred them, but not all. Some claimed the 
leather felt more secure and gave better feel or control, 
others said just the opposite. The strongest rowers generally 
preferred rope Gallaghers (see below).
Rawhide oarstraps (a.k.a. Oarstraps from Hell)
A verbal communication from Paul Lipke (Athens Airport, 
9th August, 1992) assured me [Meph Wyatt] that I was 
not the first crewperson to have troubles with rawhide. 
As a student of ancient crafts and cultures, I sometimes 
enjoy being the vehicle of a tradition; in this case I did 
not. Either we simply do not have enough understanding 
of its proper use, the material itself is cursed, or rawhide 
and Olympias are simply not meant for each other.
 Of the two model straps received from John Coates 
of the T rireme T rust, one was softened by soaking it in 
seawater and placed on the author’s oar the night before 
rowing from Poros to Aegina. Because the rawhide set at 
an improper angle, the oar having been pulled in for the 
night, the stiff strap pulled the oar off -square. After one 
day of rowing the author cut off the strap, the rawhide 
having become too stiff to slip off over the blade. 
 The other model was left to soak overnight for installation 
the next morning. However, an overzealous crewman 
emptied the soaking pail into the harbour before the author 
returned. Perhaps this should have been accepted as an 
omen.
 Things got worse. Of the three straps cut from a 25 mm 
thick piece of rawhide provided by the T rireme T rust USA, 
two stretched so much from their own weight upon lifting 
out of the soaking water that they could not be deployed. 
The third was eaten by the ship’s canine mascot.
 The plain, one-piece straps having proved unsuccessful, 
the author decided to try braiding the rawhide, thinking 
that multiple strands would increase friction and thereby 
reduce excessive stretching. This experiment resulted in 
some improvements.
 The author made three single-loop braided grommets, 
one four -strand, one five -strand, one eight -strand. The 
four-strand grommet was placed on the author’s oar 
for observation. Although it did stretch considerably, 
the author was able to take up the slack by occasionally 
pulling out the [removable, thranite] thole-pin and giving 
the whole strap a counterclockwise turn or two before 
reinserting the pin. By 9th August, the author had made 
ten such turns, and could take no more without shortening 
the strap’s loop too much for the thole pin to fit into it. 
When installed on 4th August, the four-strand strap had 
been almost too tight.
 Fabricated from scraps as an afterthought, the five-strand 
grommet did not even survive the setting process. On 7th 
August, when high winds kept us in port all day, the author 
put it on an oar (No. 27 starboard zygian), and tied the 
oar in catch position before going to breakfast. By the 
time the author returned, pressure from wind -generated 
chop had stretched the rawhide and broken some of the 
strands.
 The eight-strand grommet (installed on No. 7 Starboard 
Zygian) turned out to be the most successful of the three, 
perhaps confirming the hypothesis that increasing the 
number of strands decreases the amount of stretch. 
 However, both the zygian who rowed the eight-strand 
grommet and the author noted that the braided grommets 
tended to torque the oars slightly, but discernibly, 
off-square. Because an experimental eight-strand grommet 
of ‘ilihau’ (bark of the hau, hibiscus tiliaceus ) installed 
on No. 8 port zygian’s oar also forced that oar slightly 
off-square, this author concludes that plaiting, not the 
material plaited, caused the torsion. This hypothesis may 
be worth testing in future trials. Perhaps braided oarstraps 
will prove useful in a different configuration, one that 
balances opposing torque forces.
Rope grommets
Of the several devices used in 1992, rope grommets proved 
the most satisfactory to both rowers and maintenance 
personnel. After some experimentation the author and her 
helpers installed twelve rope grommets, six single loops 
and six double loops, on four triads, wrapping them with 
different colours of tape to indicate their positions in each 
triad. For 3/8 inch (8 mm) manila line, we found 560–650 
mm to be the best length for a single loop grommet, and 
1230 mm for a double. (Fig. 1.4.6 top). One thranite (No. 
5 starboard) cut his off because he found it pulling his 
oar off-square, and a zygian (No. 22 starboard) reported 
that his stretched in the course of a morning’s outing. A 
defective splice apparently caused this stretch. T o correct it, 
the author removed the grommet’s top loop from the pin, 
gave the rope two counter -clockwise turns, and replaced 
it on the pin. This took up the stretch and solved the 
problem (Fig. 1.4.6 middle). These rope grommets were 
deployed on 3rd August, before commencement of speed 
and maneuvring trials. Considering the material stresses 
these trials engender, and the inexperience of the chief 
fabricator, the grommets performed remarkably well. 
Except for the case noted above, we had no problems 
with stretch. 
 Indeed, the grommets’ sole apparent drawback is their 
immutability and the precision of manufacture they 
demand. If they are a few millimeters too short, even large 
===== PAGE 41 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke28
applications of grease, sweat, and profanity will not loosen 
them enough to make them useable. If they are too long, 
there must be enough extra length to give a tight fit with 
a particular number of extra turns. 
 In Olympias, since the oars do not have sacrificial, 
protective leathers, the oars have been worn to different 
diameters at the pivot point. Thus it was impossible to 
make grommets all of one diameter that were correctly 
sized for most locations. This task would obviously be 
easier with new oars if they were more uniform in shaft 
diameter at the pivot. 
Gallaghers
Named for Olympias rower Shawn Gallagher, who uses 
them when rowing in his home waters of Florida, a 
Gallagher is a length of rope wrapped three times around 
the oar and the thole pin and tied with a square knot. The 
turns must be placed so they do not get trapped between 
the oar and its supporting carling block; for thranites and 
zygians the lower part of the turn is inboard of the pin, 
for thalamians the lower turn is positioned outboard of 
the pin (we found that 1300–1400 mm of 3/8 in. manila 
sufficed). Because it was faster and easier to cut line than to 
splice grommets or manufacture leather straps, we decided 
to use Gallaghers on most of the oars. 
 The device’s advantages derive from its simplicity. It 
requires neither tools nor expertise nor very much time to 
rig and adjust. Most crew members seemed to like having 
this measure of control over their equipment.
 By the same token, its drawbacks are of a simple nature; 
knots can stretch or even break, and not everyone makes 
good knots. Some rowers complained of having to retie 
their ropes two or three times each hour, usually because 
they had not yet learned how to knot them properly. 
 The author does not know the number of Gallaghers 
that broke or stretched too much to be usable, but there 
do not seem to have been many. Those that did were 
often recycled for light duty jobs such as water bottle 
lanyards. 
 Double-loop straps: the date of installation is in the 
first parentheses. The initial measurement for all double 
loops was 685 mm. The leather having become twisted 
and stiff from use, precise final measurements were hard 
to obtain when they were taken on 8th August. Therefore 
some of these may err by one or two mm.
1.  (29th July) 798mm (No. 11 port thranite)
2.  (29th July) 803mm (No. 11 port zygian)
3.  (29th July) 762mm (No. 11 port thalamian, later No. 
13 port zygian)
4. (29th July) 791mm (No. 20 port zygian)
5. (29th July) 768mm (No. 20 port thalamian)
6. (29th July) 760mm (No. 20 port thranite)
7. lost overboard
8. (29th July) 777mm (No. 24 starboard thalamian, later 
No. 4 port thranite)
9. (29th July) 722mm (No. 24 starboard zygian, later No. 
5 port thalamian)
Figure 1.4.6. Top: single loop grommet made of manila, 
rawhide or ‘ilihau; middle: single loop grommet that has 
been twisted to remove slack; bottom: a single loop leather 
strap, installed.
10. (29th July) 800mm (No. 24 starboard thranite, later No. 
5 port zygian). This double loop grommet was lost. The 
last measurement was taken on 5th August.
11. (4th August) 767mm (No. 27 port thranite)
12. (4th August) Lost (No. 4 starboard thranite)
13. (4th August) 778mm (No. 27 port zygian)
14.  (4th August) 823mm (No. 27 port thalamian)
15.  (4th August) 765mm (No. 4 starboard zygian)
During 1992, the hard polypropylene thole-ropes used on 
some oars tended to wear the oars. The other manila ropes 
were worn away by the oars. In 1993, the oars wore away 
the sisal thole-ropes quite significantly. Since we believe 
the thole-straps should be leather, authenticity is not an 
issue here, only cost, looks and practicality.
 In 1993 a short experiment was conducted by equipping 
two triads with new, 10 mm sisal, two triads with 12 mm 
terylene and two triads with 12 mm hempex (a medium 
polypropylene made to look like hemp). These were chosen 
simply because they were available.
 The results of this short experiment were:
1. Sisal
a.  was worn by the oar
b.  was fairly easy to tie and did not stretch
===== PAGE 42 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 29
c.  tended to un-strand (rope which un-strands does not 
last)
d.  had a natural appearance
2. Soft polypropylene
a.  did not wear rope or oar
b.  was easy to tie, but stretched 
c.  had easy-to-seal ends
d.  was bright blue in colour
3. T erylene
a.  did not wear the oar but the rope suffered from friction 
burn
b.  was beautiful to handle and tie but stretched
c.  unstranded easily
d.  had a pure white colour
4. Hempex
a.  did not wear the oar or rope
b.  was easy to tie and did not stretch
c.  had easy-to-seal ends
d.  had a natural look
The Hempex was regarded as the best rope. I also used it 
in 8 mm thickness for the foot stretchers.
 Previous reports and this one have commented on the 
difficulties and failures of leather thole straps. Given the 
difficulties we have had with leather, I wonder if we are 
using the correct approach. The word ‘oarloop’ is given 
in The Athenian Trireme as a translation of Thucydides. 
Crawley’s Everyman Edition reads ‘thong.’ A Penguin 
translation of Aeschlyus’ The Persians calls it a thong as 
well. I would suggest experimenting with a strap, rather 
than a loop: specifically a long narrow strap with a small 
loop in one end and a long tail (see Fig. 1.4.6 bottom). 
 The loop fits closely over the thole pin and the strap 
is then wound around the oar with the required pattern 
and tension. Then take one or two turns around the top 
of the thole pin to take the strain and fasten off the tail 
end to a fixing point (such as a notch, cleat or whatever) 
paced astern to maintain tension. This would be easy to 
make, more authentic, and quicker to fit and adjust than 
rope.
1.4.4 Repairs while underway
It is possible to undertake many minor repairs to the ship’s 
gear while under oar or sail, thus greatly increasing the 
ship’s operational efficiency. Even a breakage in rowing 
furniture does not necessarily put the affected triad out 
of action until the ship is moored.
 In 1988, whaleboat rower and trireme section leader 
Corny Foster introduced the trireme project to the practice 
of instructing rowers to use ‘air shots’ when problems need 
to be addressed in a small part of a vessel moving under 
oar. A common practice in whaleboat rowing, calling for 
air shots means the affected rowers continue to ‘row’ but 
keep their oars in the air at all times and slightly shorten 
the length of their stroke. Once air shots are instituted, 
T able 1.4.2. Stretch Measurements for Leather Oarstraps


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 










 




 
 
                 

 
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
  
 
               
  
 


T able 1.4.1. Situations and Types of Experimental Oarstraps

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 










 




 
 
                 

 
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
  
 
               
  
 


===== PAGE 43 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke30
those rowers who need to stop rowing completely can do 
so. In this way those rowers just outside the affected area 
can continue to row normally, since the adjacent rowers 
are still swinging their bodies in time, and getting their 
backs out of the way.
 In Olympias, when a thole strap works loose, a blade 
breaks, or some other gear failure occurs, there is a short, 
but intense initial period of confusion. Those around the 
affected rower are trying to figure out what has happened 
and/or communicate what has happened to others. This 
period is greatly abbreviated or eliminated if the effected 
rowers or section leader call for air shots in three triads, 
specifically the triad that is directly involved and those just 
forward and aft of it, i.e., “Air shots, port (or starboard) 
triads number X, Y and Z.” Within a second or two, the 
affected rower’s sense of danger and concern that too many 
people are talking at once, subsides. This is very helpful 
since either of these can lead to panic. The situation can 
then be assessed, and the necessary repairs or adjustments 
planned. 
 Most typically, air shots would be needed when a thole 
strap stretched too much or came untied. In this case, all 
that would be necessary once air shots were instituted, 
would be for the affected rower to i) pull their oar in part 
way, ii) tighten or replace the strap, iii) run the oar out 
again, and iv) fall in with the rowers doing the air shots. 
Then all three triads can fall back into rowing normally 
with the rest of the ship. 
 If carpentry or the replacement of an oar is required, 
certain rowers can vacate their seats for the gangway to 
let the carpenter climb into them to work, or they can 
simply stop rowing to help swap oars while those around 
them continue with air shots. Over the past four sets of 
trials, section leaders, rowers and the ship’s carpenters have 
undertaken a variety of tasks while underway, including 
driving back into place loose pins, foot clog fastenings, 
carling blocks, and foot stretcher adjustment pins; and 
lashing split stretcher rails. It must be said that virtually all 
of these minor but irritating repairs would be unnecessary 
in a trireme with more carefully built rowing furniture.
 Thranite and zygian oars can be easily replaced with 
spares using the assistance of a section leader or spare rower 
working from the gangway or canopy. The damaged oar 
is run part way in, the strap untied, and then the oar is 
pulled in by passing the handle end up to the helper on 
the gangway. The damaged oar and spares are stored out 
of the way on the canopy. The process is reversed with the 
new oar the helper passes down.
 Replacing a thalamian oar can be accomplished while 
under oar, but it involves a more complicated procedure 
which also disrupts more than three triads. The three 
triads rowing on the opposite side of the ship have to stop 
rowing also, in order to bring the old oar all the way in 
and store it in the bilge, then to pass the new oar out the 
oarport. Since thalamian oars are very strong (p. 23) their 
replacement was rarely necessary. In any case it was usually 
easier for the thalamian in question to stop rowing and ship 
their oar, allow all the other triads to resume rowing, and 
then replace the oar when the next rest break was called 
for the entire crew.
 Very occasionally a zygian or thalamian thole pin will 
work loose. This is due to poor boring during construction. 
Under way, air shots are called, the rower in question ships 
their oar, is handed a hammer or mallet, and the pin is 
driven home again in a few seconds. If the pin is very loose, 
a few layers of cloth or tape can be wound around the 
pin before it is hammered back in. As a more permanent 
repair, undertaken between outings, a nail or dowel can 
be driven through a pre-drilled hole through the carling 
block into the pin. 
1.4.5 Rowing furniture tolerance: lessons from the 
‘Seats From Hell’
Note: This passage was written years before the concept of 
canting the seats (see pp. 76–91) was developed. Despite 
the great potential of this design change to improve the 
performance of a trireme reconstruction, much of what 
follows remains highly relevant.
During the 1992 trials, a number of seats in the bow of 
Olympias seemed to be rather problematic for whomever 
sat in them. Most typically, problems seemed to occur 
during the catch of the stroke. For example, in one seat 
a rower might complain that the catch of the stroke was 
more restricted than in other seats, in another a thranite 
might report that the zygian in his/her triad could never 
fully immerse the blade at the catch, no matter how high 
and hard the hands came up at the end of the recovery.
 The entire crew was then asked to report any ‘seats from 
hell’ and from the list of complaints nine authentically 
bad positions were located. Four of the nine were 
reported from the aftmost section to starboard, from 
triads containing disproportionate numbers of veteran 
trireme rowers. The other problem seats were scattered 
throughout the ship.
 When the nine bad seats were investigated, in all but 
one case the problem could be traced to slight mis-locations 
of rowing furniture and/or the outrigger brackets. These 
mis-locations ranged from 3 to 12 mm off the average, 
as established by measuring gear from seats that were not 
problematic. In one case several small errors in rowing 
furniture placement combined to make a noticeable 
problem. For the record, the problems (now mostly 
corrected) are shown in Table 1.4.3. 
 Olympias’s furniture is consistently built. In series-built 
fleets of ships of the size and complexity of triremes, errors 
as large as 12 mm in locating internal fittings would not 
be surprising. Indeed they were almost certainly inevitable, 
even given the remarkable workmanship demonstrated 
in excavated ancient ships (Frost 1976; Steffy 1985). The 
author’s hands-on experience in wooden ship building and 
repair also supports this conclusion. 
 Yet it cannot be denied that small errors in gear 
positioning do cause problems in Olympias, as shown 
===== PAGE 44 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 31
above. This indicates that either the ancient builders kept 
to very tight tolerances in rowing furniture manufacture 
and installation, or it indicates a larger problem with 
Olympias’ design. 
 Within the project, there have been discussions as 
to whether the design of a second, improved trireme 
reconstruction can be adjusted so that:
i)  rowers of a pre-set maximum height are unrestricted by 
the cross beams or underslung zygian seats
ii)  the ship is more tolerant of individual variations in 
ergonometrics, rowing styles and body types, ideally to 
the same degree as is typically achieved in a seagoing, 
fixed-seat pulling boat of the 19th century
iii)  equal or even greater inconsistencies in construction do 
not generate ‘seats from hell.’ 
To achieve these ends, the relative positions (fore and aft 
and vertically) of the rowers in each triad will probably have 
to be shifted slightly, a few centimetres in one direction 
or another. The beams restricting the thalamians, and 
upon which the zygians sit, would probably be made less 
deep in section. 
 These changes sound simple enough to puzzle out, 
but the interactions and ramifications involved are very 
complex. A number of the most numerate of the project’s 
participants have come to believe that nothing short 
of the construction, testing and modification of a full-
scale, floating, rowable, adjustable mock-up will make it 
possible to sort out all the issues without inadvertently 
creating other problems. This test vessel’s initial furniture 
positioning would be based upon the slight changes 
indicated by operations with Olympias. 
 If these aims cannot be achieved in such a vehicle, 
then unless and until the remains of an ancient trireme 
are excavated and studied, we cannot know if such high 
tolerances were essential to, and achieved in, ancient 
triremes.
 In the meantime, the argument in favour of the ancient 
shipwrights achieving very high standards of tolerance in 
ancient triremes could be summarized as follows:
 Hand tools, templates, and ‘go’ or ‘no go’ gauges can 
produce very consistent work, even from rough-sawn or 
riven material. The design of these ships evolved over many 
years, and excavated shipwrecks consistently show high 
standards of workmanship. We know from accounts such as 
Aristophanes Birds 108 that good trireme construction was 
something to be proud of; this might be one reason why.
The opposing view would be:
 Excavated shipwrecks like the Kyrenia Wreck, admitting 
they are not warships, show larger variations in the 
placement of their parts, especially internal timbers that 
might be used as reference points, such as framing. The 
gear in Olympias in general is intolerant of individual 
variations in body type and ergonometrics, and creates 
problems even when built to tight specifications. If Mark 
II can be made more tolerant of placement errors it would 
go a long way to show that the basic configuration of the 
rowing furniture is correct.
 A second, less critical question that comes to mind as 
a result of the ‘seats from hell’ is why many problem seats 
were clustered in one area. Perhaps these more experienced 
trireme rowers were getting picky. More likely, they had 
become the catalyst for a longer than average stroke for 
that part of the ship. In this case the limitations of the 
rowing furniture with which the ship was designed and 
built could be expected to be felt more keenly.
Bibliography
Frost. H. (1976) Lilybaeum (Marsala). Notizie degli scavi di 
antichità: Serie Ottava 30.
Steffy, J. R. (1985) The Kyrenia ship: An interim report on 
its hull construction. American Journal of Archaeology 89, 
71–101


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 










 




 
 
                 

 
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
  
 
               
  
 


T able 1.4.3.
===== PAGE 45 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke32
1.5. Different perspectives on some reported 
results
Paul Lipke, with assistance from Ford Weiskittel
This chapter explores some of the disagreements in 
observations and interpretation of events among some project 
participants created by the ship’s compartmentalization, 
and by participants’ varying experience and duties. It 
closes with a dissenting opinion as to what are Olympias’ 
achievable speeds.
1.5.1. The critical context: compartmentalization
Interdisciplinary and cross-cultural efforts were made in 
the T rireme Project. Even so, the project’s large scale meant 
any assessment of a given situation was highly influenced 
by one’s position, both physically and organizationally. 
With such a unique project, it would no doubt have 
been ideal if we’d had the time and energy to invest in 
creating what experts in organizational learning call a 
“learning history.” In full form, such a history documents 
how and why T rireme Project participants learned what 
they learned, how opinions formed, how interpersonal 
dynamics have influenced the project, etc. Learning 
histories can provide project managers and future historians 
with invaluable context. Unfortunately, because of the 
scope and complexity of the project such a history would 
have consumed, quite literally, thousands of person-hours 
and pages of text, and so was not within our capabilities. 
To compensate, the following material is meant to both 
provide readers with a sense of this missing rich context, 
and to make some important disagreements as to the 
meanings of certain events explicit so that readers may 
judge matters for themselves.
1.5.2. Physical constraints
Physically, an individual’s particular field of vision and 
auditory range greatly skewed their impression of any 
given event. For reasons explained below, if the rowing 
masters spent most of their time in the very stern (as was 
likely in order to be near the captain, helmsman and the 
emergency sound system) their impression of the crew’s 
freshness was different than if they roamed forward (at 
least as far as the mainmast) and observed and spoke with 
the crew in the bow. Similarly, the experiences of section 
leaders and rowers in the bow were often rather different 
from those in the stern. 
 There were a lot of things happening simultaneously 
with a lot of people in a small, complex space. A rower’s 
observations of the causes of a given problem in their triad 
were often quite different from those of the section leaders 
in the gangway who could see larger patterns, which were 
themselves often different from the assessments of those 
in command in the stern. It was also easy to misinterpret 
nuances of the ship’s operations without either direct 
experience in the seat of the persons involved, or repeated 
close observation of a situation. 
1.5.3. Organizational constraints
As in any setting, an individual’s context, meaning and 
level of effort are shaped by the quality and quantity of 
information and learning, the level of responsibility, and 
the accuracy and rapidity of any feedback loops. The 
complexity of the T rireme Project and the number of things 
happening simultaneously meant there was always an 
extremely wide range of information levels, responsibility, 
and feedback effectiveness among the participants. 
 The debriefing that followed each outing routinely 
involved listening to the differing accounts of observers and 
participants, and then piecing together a more accurate, 
consensus-based picture of what had actually happened. 
Appropriate decisions about corrective measures, further 
testing, etc. could then be made. 
 To understand differing views from different 
organizational levels, it is essential to understand the 
observers’ situations and backgrounds. In Olympias’ case, 
these differences often resulted in materially differing 
points of view and interpretations of data, examples of 
which are given below. It is important to note a similar 
comparison could be written between almost any two 
members of the trials leadership, and between rowers from 
different parts and levels of the ship. 
1.5.4. The impact of compartmentalization: two 
perspectives on four matters
This section summarizes two participants’ backgrounds and 
interpretations of the same issues and or events. 
Participant 1
Boris Rankov is a famous, competitive sliding-seat, 
flat-water rower and a Professor of Ancient History. As 
one of Olympias’ two primary rowing masters, he has 
had responsibility for “the big picture,” the successful 
performance of the ship, powered by its oarcrew. It is 
unfortunate that after having taken on the substantial task 
of selecting and organizing the rowers for the 1987 trials, a 
last minute back injury prevented him from being present 
that first year. His absence was a loss to those first days 
on the water, during which the volume and complexity of 
issues to be addressed put a high premium on a leadership 
of diverse and deep experience. This complexity is well 
summarized in his telling contribution to the report of 
the 1990 trials, ‘Rowing Olympias: A Matter of Skill’ 
(Rankov 1993). The back injury has also, unfortunately, 
prevented him from gaining much subsequent experience 
pulling an oar in Olympias: he has rowed briefly one time 
each in a thranite and zygian seat. As a result, his writings 
on rowing Olympias come from the reports of others, his 
astute observations and from conversations with rowers 
and section leaders. From his collegiate rowing background 
and position of command, he naturally: 
===== PAGE 46 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 33
i)  spent the majority of his time aboard Olympias in the 
stern.
ii)  met with co-rowing master Ford Weiskittel nearly every 
day to assign a specific seat to every rower in the ship. 
iii)  sat the weakest rowers in the bow, as is the norm in a 
racing shell
iv)  took much of his data, perspectives and details from 
rowers near the stern, whom he considered to be 
Olympias’ stroke rowers 
Participant 2
This author, Paul Lipke, is a wood scientist, a wooden 
boatbuilder, a recreational sliding-seat and open-water, 
fixed-seat rower who has served in Olympias since 1987 
as co-organizer of the North American contingent of 
the oarcrew, director of the pre-trials US training camp, 
ship’s photographer, section leader (in the bow and mid-
ship sections) ship’s carpenter and a rower in all positions 
from 1987–1993. Daily, he undertook or supervised the 
extensive work maintaining and modifying the ship’s 
rowing equipment, and focused on becoming intimately 
familiar with - and finding solutions for - the particular 
challenges of individual rowers, sections of rowers, and of 
the entire oarcrew. From Lipke’s ocean rowing background 
and position as ship’s carpenter and section leader he:
i)  focused more on how the ship’s structure and mechanics 
influenced the stroke (especially in bow versus stern 
issues).
ii)  focused his energies and time on the rowers in the bow 
when he perceived the need for a strong bow section 
leader.
iii)  urged rowers under his charge to gravitate towards the 
seating position in which they felt most productive. 
iv)  lacked Rankov’s heightened awareness of the nuances of 
timing.
Thus, the difference in perspective between Rankov and 
Lipke is that of a big-picture management view contrasting 
with a close-up view of the problems of individual 
rowers and sections, as influenced by the project’s and 
the ship’s management and design. Having summarized 
their respective perspectives, what follows are some of 
the most important examples of the different views that 
arose as a result.
1.5.4.1 Issues of timing
In ‘Rowing Olympias: A Matter of Skill,’ Rankov (1993, 
54–5) wrote “The sternmost block of rowers was, in effect, 
stroking the ship…” If the piped signal for the catch of 
the stroke was not timed fractionally early to allow time 
for the sound to travel down the ship, “those in the stern 
“[took] the full weight of the ship as their oars entered 
the water. Inevitably, the latter began to tire very quickly.” 
This author’s views of the distribution of work between 
bow and stern and the timing of the piped signal for the 
catch of the stroke are quite different. 
 Rowers in the bow would often say the outing was hard 
work, while stern rowers insisted the same outing was only 
a modest work-out. His explanation is that stern rowers 
worked with their immersed blades in the turbulent race 
(or ‘slipstream’) created by dozens of closely-spaced oars 
further forward pushing water towards the stern. As a 
result, when seated in the stern, even with almost no effort 
the author felt his blade slip through the water relatively 
quickly when the ship was moving at more than about 4½ 
knots. In the bow the water was relatively undisturbed, 
and therefore the oar slipped less and the rower was able 
to make a longer, more sustained pull. Thus the drive of 
the stroke for a bow oarsman was relatively slow, and the 
recovery had to be completed relatively quickly. All in all, 
the stern rowers’ period of effort was fractionally shorter 
than that for rowers in the bow. Ideally the project would 
have had the capacity to settle the matter by recording the 
actual energy expended by the same rowers, seated first 
in the bow and then in the stern, rowing in otherwise 
identical positions with the same rowing mates, during 
identical rowing conditions.
 Because of the differences, bow to stern, in the relative 
effort and timing of the stroke’s drive and recovery, the 
best results in timing of the piped signal occurred when 
Ford Weiskittel, working as rowing master or auletes, 
scanned both sides and the full length of the ship, and 
then gave the catch and finish signal fractionally ahead of 
an average point in time derived, more often than not, 
from the midships sections. If the rowing fell out of time, 
the rowing masters or auletes had to consciously fight the 
tendency to take a unifying stroke cue off the stern-most 
rowers. 
 The author believes the tendency arose: i) from racing-
shell rowing traditions in which the stern-most rower 
is considered the stroke oar, ii) from a tendency for 
experienced (and often more vocal) racing shell rowers to 
want to row in the stern for the same reason, iii) from the 
visual accessibility of stern rowers to the rowing masters, 
who stood in the stern in order to be near the helmsman 
and Hellenic Navy’s captain, and iv) because it was only at 
the end of the 1990 trials, at Weiskittel’s and this author’s 
instigation, that the project stopped seating the weakest 
rowers in the bow.
1.5.4.2 Impact of ship’s structure on thalamian rowers
Rankov (1993, 52) has written:
The proximity of the zygian beams to the backs of the 
potential [crabbing] victim’s head has undoubtedly had 
a psychological effect on all of Olympias’ thalamians to 
date, encouraging them to row well within themselves... 
Moreover, the crossbeams also restrict the maximum length 
of the thalamian stroke, and therefore, of course, of the 
stroke at all three levels.
In this author’s view, the psychological problem created 
by the zygian beams, as outlined by Rankov, was largely 
overcome in 1988 and improved still further later on by 
improving the training of thalamians. From then on, the 
vast majority of thalamians did not hold back when rowing 
===== PAGE 47 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke34
due to the crossbeams, and used every part of the space 
available (Shaw 1993b, 77). Photographs and video-taped 
records show thalamians touching (and even whacking) 
both the beam in front and behind themselves with their 
heads on every stroke. This resulted in minor skin wounds 
on thalamian foreheads and necks. More tellingly, many 
had ‘recovery bruises’ in the small of their backs (from the 
hands of the rower just forward of their seat). The Medical 
Report (which see) by Dr. Denis Chagnon documents that 
56% of thalamians said they experienced being “bruised 
or bashed in the back by the rower behind.” 
 This author believes the focus on the zygian beams as 
thalamian obstructions has tended to overshadow - in 
trials, crew training and published reports - the fact that 
the back of the rower immediately towards the stern was a 
more serious obstacle to good rowing. The author found 
he could often dramatically increase rowing comfort and 
length of stroke by climbing into the bilge adjacent to the 
thalamians, and systematically reminding each thalamian 
to adjust their foot-stretcher position to optimize their 
own reach and that of the next rower in line. In contrast, 
if one rower fails to adjust their foot stretcher and sits too 
far back on their seat, many others are cramped.
 Over time our over-attention to the zygian beams has 
been corrected. The initial design for a second trireme 
reconstruction includes minor changes to the zygian 
beams, and more importantly, changing the seat height 
and athwartship orientations of the rowing gear so as to 
allow the arc of the thalamian oar handle to clear the 
back of the next rower. As this publication goes to press, 
new evidence indicates trieres ship-sheds were longer than 
previously thought, and therefore it may well be possible 
for a new trireme reconstruction even to avoid canting 
the rowing furniture.
5.4.3. Thalamians catching crabs
Rankov (1993, 51–2) has described problems related to 
thalamians catching crabs. This description has encouraged 
some people to question Olympias’ design and viability as 
a reconstruction. A somewhat detailed alternative view of 
thalamian crabbing problems in 1987 (and thereafter) is 
offered here. This author’s direct experience was that:
i)  Zygians instigated thalamian crabs by over-reaching 
thalamians, not generally by mis-timing the catch of the 
stroke (as stated by Rankov). The first rowing master, 
Michael Budd (1989 109), points this out. The thalamian 
blade most typically continued to dive “irretrievably 
down into the depths” because it was under-square 
(tilted off the vertical, with the lower edge further aft 
than the upper edge) as a result of the oar shaft’s shoulder 
rolling on the mis-shaped thole pin block upon which 
it rested.
ii)  Thalamian crabs were solved as a serious problem at 
the suggestion of rower Peter MacLeod, beginning on 
the third day of trials in 1987 (Budd 1989, 109), not 
in 1988 as stated by Rankov (1993, 52). They were 
reduced still further early in 1988 as the rowing masters 
and section leaders got better at teaching the requisite 
techniques and we modified certain equipment. This was 
accomplished by a) instructing thalamians to keep their 
blades on the square, b) telling the thranite rowers to 
keep their blades between the zygian and the thalamian 
of their triad, especially so the zygian learned not to over-
reach the thalamian, c) removing the offending corners 
of the thalamian’s oar pin blocks, and iv) by adding 
thalamian preventer ropes, primarily as a psychological 
safety measure. There will be more upon this last point 
below.
  Rankov (1993, 51) is of the opinion that, thalamian 
crabs in 1987 were “frequent” and: “…invariably 
accompanied by a harrowing scream which could be 
heard throughout the ship, shattering the morale of 
other thalamians. The victims were in real danger...”It is 
not stated in this passage from what point of view these 
dangers were perceived and subsequently reported to 
Rankov. This author’s view, from his first hand experience 
as a 1987 section coach, is that the dangers reported to 
Rankov were greatly exaggerated: 
iii)  When the oar handle of a crabbed thalamian blade comes 
to rest, it actually leaves enough space between the handle 
and the zygian beam just forward of it for a) the rowers 
head and neck, b) an air space of an inch of two, and 
c) the rower’s hands. In fact, the thalamian gets ‘pinned’ 
when his/her wrists, grasping the oar handle, are fully 
curled and forced upwards towards their chin. Their 
shoulders then rise, and their head or neck is pushed 
back (towards the bow) and up against the beam. 
iv)  This author was unable to uncover any evidence that a 
thalamian has ever been more than bruised by catching 
a crab. There is no mention of such injuries in the 1987 
report even though the rowing master, Michael Budd, 
was a physician. Dr. Denis Chagnon, Olympias’ medical 
officer for the 1990–1993 events, told this author in a 
personal communication in 1998, “I cannot recall ever 
hearing of or seeing a rower with injuries worse than a 
bruise that were the result of catching a crab.”
v)  This author can remember only one or two occasions 
when a thalamian offered something approaching a 
“harrowing scream.” Catching a crab usually causes 
rowers to grunt! Initially, any shouts came from adjacent 
rowers calling for the entire crew to stop rowing because, 
since the thalamian rarely “screamed,” no one else (i.e. the 
rowing masters) was immediately aware of the problem. 
By issuing loud safety whistles to all the section leaders 
and telling the crew that a single long whistle blast 
meant ‘Stop rowing immediately!’ the crab ‘emergency’ 
communication problem was largely eliminated. As crabs 
became very rare and our ability to extricate rowers from 
them adept, it got to the point where most of the time 
only the 3–6 rowers in the immediate vicinity of the 
crab had to momentarily stop rowing, and then only if 
the trapped rower, the triad and/or their section leader 
determined they needed to stop at all.
vi)  Installing safety ropes on thalamian oar handles was 
largely of psychological value. This is demonstrated by 
the fact that by 1988 this author observed that most 
thalamians did not use them after the first few outings, 
even though the trials management urged their constant 
===== PAGE 48 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 35
use, and insisted on them during high power speed trials, 
or if rowers were getting tired. The resistance to their use 
arose because they caused abrasions on rowers’ hands. 
Raw spots causing pain on every stroke are far more 
troublesome to Olympias’ rowers than the low risk of 
catching a crab or the minor bruise that might result.
1.5.4.4 Prior rowing experience among crew members
Rankov (1993, 50) expresses the opinion that the challenges 
faced by the 1987 trials were significantly aggravated by 
the fact there were in the crew “too many men and women 
without rowing experience of any kind.”
 Recent correspondence between Rankov and Lipke 
revealed this view to be based on a) Rankov having vetted 
the 1987 applicants, b) comments to Rankov by 1987 crew 
member Stephen Walter, and c) Rankov’s own observations 
– in 1988 and later – of crew members without rowing 
experience. 
 The view of this author, who was an active coach in 
1987 is that the difficulties resulted far more from a totally 
understandable lack of knowledge on the part of the trials 
leadership on how to prepare, train and direct a trireme’s 
crew. After all, no one had done so in thousands of years! 
Rankov writes of “the mistaken belief amongst recruiters 
that...skills acquired [in modern rowing boats] would not 
give any significant advantage.” It implies that non-rowers 
can only be allowed some unspecified (by implication quite 
small) number of seats in a successful trials crew. 
 There are several points to be made here:
i)  Experienced rowers were critical to the success of the 
sea trials where all the learning has to be compressed 
into a few weeks. However Rankov implies, but is too 
tactful to say outright, how hard it was to get many 
of them to row in a way that suited Olympias! Their 
experience often came with a lot of mental baggage. In 
recruiting a modern trireme crew, flexibility of mind 
can be as important as fitness or experience. We found 
the more open attitudes of the non-rowers, combined 
with the more collaborative style of the women in the 
crew (however historically inaccurate, and whether they 
were experienced rowers or not) helped open the minds 
of the experienced rowers.
ii)  The present author co-directed, with rowing master Ford 
Weiskittel, the two-day, intensive training camp given 
North American rowers before departure for Greece. 
This training camp, including a training manual sent to 
participants in advance, detailed briefings, rigorous drills 
in a 9-seat mock-up of Olympias, and in whaleboats, 
showed it wasn’t hard to bring most non-rowers up 
to a decent standard. We believe one quarter (perhaps 
more) of our modern oarcrew could be ‘raw recruits’ 
without unduly impacting upon the trials. As Rankov 
rightly says, in classical times the best triremes certainly 
benefited from the vast majority (if not the entirety) 
of their rowers’ extensive prior experience. But based 
on our experience in Olympias, I believe we can assert 
with confidence that in times of large deployments the 
average trieres of a classical Athenian fleet could have 
managed reasonably well with significant numbers of 
inexperienced men, even if battle was relatively near at 
hand, given an aggressive, if brief, training period. 
1.5.4.5. Conclusions
In summary of all these differences, it is quite clear that 
each of these participant’s natural bias and positions 
strongly influenced what they observed and thought. 
Through lengthy and often heated discussion, what co-
evolved between the Rankov, Lipke, and others was a 
consensus that:
i)  At higher speeds, a quick firm catch was required. As a 
result, sternward members of the crew need to be quick 
and firm at the catch to get solid pressure on the blade 
at all, and had to be strong and fast to maintain power. 
It was easier for bow rowers to apply power. Thus, for 
the ship’s maximum performance, some of the most 
powerful rowers available should be seated in the clean 
water of the bow where their strength could have a greater 
impact, as well as distributed throughout the ship. While 
the bow-stern differences in timing are of the order of 
fractions of a second, they could still be troublesome 
due to cumulative fatigue in the bow resulting from the 
tendency of the rowing masters or auletes to forget to take 
stroke cues from the midships or overall ship’s average. 
In more demanding, longer outings or those with high 
rates of stroke, this potential was accentuated because 
the water became still more turbulent in the stern. 
ii)  The bow section leaders must work actively to reduce the 
general isolation of the bow caused by the mainmast and 
boatmast. Simultaneously, the rowing master has to leave 
his primary location in the stern and get forward as far as 
the mainmast to be attuned to what is happening before 
the mast, and the forward members of the crew have to 
work doubly hard both to stay in time with the rest of 
the ship and to hear what instructions and descriptions 
of events might be coming from the stern.
How many hours of argument and observation it took to 
cull out those gems of consensus. How ‘biased’ reports on 
Olympias would be (and readers mislead!) if such consensus 
had not generally been actively sought, matured and 
presented clearly. It is truly a case of lessons learned through 
sustained commitment to integrity and collaboration.
1.5.5. A note on Olympias’ maximum speed
Section 1.2.4 of this Report, ‘Some Results of Olympias’ 
1992 trials and Log Summary,’ explains the difficulty 
in assessing the actual speeds reached by the ship. The 
different methods used produced somewhat different 
results. In considering the arguments made, this author’s 
view is that the meaningful maximum speed achieved 
was 8.3 knots, which was sustained for about 1 minute 
under the crew’s truly Herculean effort. The 8.9 knots top 
speed published elsewhere in this work, and previously 
publications, was recorded only momentarily, if in fact 
this number actually represents the ship’s speed. This 
author recalls that Olympias ’ log readings sometimes 
jumped around quite a bit, and so suspects this number 
===== PAGE 49 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke36
might be one such unreliable spike, resulting perhaps from 
the sudden drop in oar turbulence as the crew stopped 
rowing. The author interprets the evidence to show that our 
meaningful top speed – what we could produce repeatedly 
in Olympias during a single outing, each time sustaining 
that speed for several minutes at a time as might be required 
in battle – is in the range of 7.5–8.0 knots. 
 This viewpoint does not imply any skepticism as to 
Olympias’ validity as a highly successful effort to reconstruct 
the classical Athenian trireme and reproduce its historically 
acclaimed – and oft-argued – highest speeds. If a second 
updated reconstruction is ever launched, building on the 
data and wisdom gleaned from Olympias, it will be one that 
allows rowers to use their brains, legs, back and arms fully 
to apply their power and skill, and to do so at reasonable 
stroke rates. In such a case this author believes material 
improvements in maneuverability, speed, and especially 
more sustained higher speeds, will be achieved. 
Bibliography
Budd, M. (1989) The Rowing Master’s story. In Morrison 
and Coates 1989, 109–10
Coates, J. S., Platis, S.K. and Shaw, J. T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988. Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea Trials  of 
Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Lipke, P . (1988) Trials for the trireme. Archaeology 41, 
22–9
Morrison, J. S and Coates, J. F . (eds) (1989) An Athenian T rireme 
Reconstructed. The British Sea Trials of Olympias, 1987 . 
BAR International Series 486. Oxford, Archaeopress.
Rankov, N. B. (1993) Rowing Olympias: a matter of skill. In 
Shaw 1993a, 50–7
Shaw, J. T . (ed.) (1993a) The Trireme Project. Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.  Oxbow Monograph 
31. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Shaw, J. T . (1993b) The meshing of oars in Olympias. In 
Shaw 1993, 75–7
1.6. Where the T rireme Project has gone wrong
Paul Lipke and Ford Weiskittel
1.6.1 Maximum speeds
The project’s focus on the top speeds of ancient triremes is 
wrong. The trials test programs and publications have been 
overly focused on sprint speeds, primarily as a result of the 
collegiate racing orientation of the management (ourselves 
included) and the limitations of Olympias. The use of 
cruising speed as a crucial performance criterion, instead 
of maximum speed, is both more valuable and valid. 
  Apollodorus complains of being ordered by Timomachus 
to tow grain ships more than 70 open sea miles with 
triremes ([Demosthenes] 50.22.3). This constitutes another 
very valuable (and perhaps more meaningful) challenging 
benchmark for the performance of any reconstruction.
1.6.2 Room to row
The project is over-reliant on Vitruvius’ text on the 
interscalmium (Vitruvius De architectura 1.2.4) as a basis 
for defining the ‘correct’ size of each rowing module and 
therefore the ship as a whole (Coates, Platis and Shaw 
1990, 5–6; Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 17, 133, 
245–6, 268–9). We believe the project has wasted many 
hours debating, justifying and writing about this cubit or 
that, in an attempt to justify a larger ship that would easily 
accommodate rowers of varying physiques. 
  Much of the focus on increasing the size of the 
interscalmium  and any future trireme reconstruction 
in general seems predicated on accommodating large, 
modern (5’10”-6’2”) rowers. We ask, how compelling is 
the rationale for doing so when recruiting shorter rowers 
has been shown repeatedly to be practical in the USA, 
where athletes and rowers are especially tall? If recruiting 
difficulties are driving ‘Mark II’ design criteria, that 
should be prominently stated so that future observers and 
participants will know exactly how and in what way this 
is impacting the authenticity of any reconstruction.
Furthermore, it is worthwhile to consider Vitruvius in 
a larger context. Vitruvius, in writing of warships, says 
warship designs are based on the dimension between 
rowers. The type of warship is unspecified, it could be a 
trireme, quinquereme, or some other oared war vessel. 
  As a general principle, we have no argument with 
trireme reconstructions using the interscalmium concept 
as a general design principle. However, there are three 
problems moving forward from this:
i)  We obviously don’t have the needed remains of a trireme 
to measure what that interscalmium was. 
ii)  Many ancient shipbuilding and rowing traditions use 
modular terms to define vessels without in any way 
restricting shipwrights from adjusting the size of the 
module. In the 1950’s, wooden shipbuilders of the Nile, 
Egypt were still using the same two module system for 
deckbeams as their counterparts 4,500 years before, 
but the size of the module had changed (Lipke 1984). 
The lengths of Scandinavian faerings are defined by the 
number of oar spaces, i.e. ‘four-oared faerings.’ Yet these 
vary boat to boat, builder to builder, and town to town 
as needed to suit the physique and work requirements 
of the builder’s client. 
iii)  it is a big leap to assert that a two cubit interscalmium 
was exactly two cubits, no more and no less. A ‘nine by 
twelve room’ is almost never exactly 9 feet by 12 feet. 
If the actual interscalmium used was two cubits and a 
few fingers [1 finger = 19.3 mm], it could easily still be 
called a two cubit interscalmium.
For all these reasons, basing any reconstruction on a 
measurement of exactly two cubits, regardless of the 
cubit used, is misleading and can lead to forcing rowers 
to work within unreasonable constraints. Future design 
efforts should start from bio-mechanical measurements 
of rowers. By working from the optimum interscalmium 
dimensions for rowers of given heights and physiques, as 
===== PAGE 50 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 37
archaeology increases the number of measured classical 
skeletal remains, any proposed trireme reconstructions 
could become more valid. We are certain the practical ‘two 
cubits’ so determined will be close enough to two measured 
historical cubits to make the above arguments valid.
 Such a practical two ‘cubit’ interscalmium may well be 
found to conform to the cubit purportedly used to build 
Philon’s’ Arsenal for example, it may conform to other 
historical data, but it may not. And, if it doesn’t so conform 
we maintain the demands of war, and of crew performance, 
would have forced the adoption of the ‘practical’ cubit.
 Therefore, the project should avoid canting rowers and 
their blades (pp. 76–91) as much as possible (even if it 
creates recruiting difficulties)! Canting rowers, in many 
ways a brilliant approach, will likely result in ergonomic 
challenges (and even repetitive motion injuries) for rowers 
as they spend hours on end in twisting physical exertion, 
turning their heads to look down the file to stay in time 
or trying to monitor visual commands from their Rowing 
Master or keleustes. It will probably create other problems 
we cannot yet anticipate. For each degree of canting, better 
recruiting and biomechanical measurements are more 
strongly justified.
 Note: In 
Olympias, temporary lowering and testing 
of four or five thalamian seats and their foot bracing 
was planned for 1994 by Paul Lipke and John Howarth 
(pending Hellenic Navy approval) but in the end the 
former could not attend those trials and no modifications 
were made. 
 A bio-mechanical approach would:
i) measure rowers to determine the space through which 
their bodies move in a fixed-seat stroke over extended 
rowing periods. This has been done by Ford Weiskittel 
and others, the data needs to be analyzed in order to:
ii) determine the optimum interscalmium for given height 
and physique. 
iii) review skeletal evidence from Herculaneum and Haliae 
and compare this with our crew’s data, considering 
socio-economic history of the persons whose excavated 
remains we have, with respect to diet, physique, height 
etc.
iv) compare all the above data to Olympias’s, and the Archaic 
and Doric cubits
v) explore whether such an interscalmium is achievable in 
a ship identical or near to Olympias in length with the 
following reasoning and changes:
 a)  lowering of the thalamian seats (using different 
foot restraints attached directly on the inner hull/
framing); and
 b)  making the zyga truly a shallow, roughly rectangular 
cross-sectioned plank the zygian can sit on directly, 
thereby gaining additional clearance for the 
thalamian.
It is not necessary to lower the oarport proportionally, 
since thalamians are currently rowing with their wrists so 
low that a few thick-thighed thalamians have had trouble 
clearing small waves, and all thalamians have trouble 
clearing large waves during recovery. We have no trireme 
remains. We cannot know how watertight the ancient 
Greeks might have been able to make askomata. We cannot 
know what risks classical seamen were willing to take, i.e. 
how low they might have placed thalamian oarports.
 The main argument against reducing the depth of 
the zyga has been loss of hull torsional stiffness. Some 
loss of hull torsional stiffness from reducing the depth 
of the zyga is acceptable since both tenon failure due to 
moisture cycling and hull shearing forces, and weakness 
and leakage due to shipworm, can be shown to be far 
more serious threats to a trireme’s effectiveness and life 
span. These threats are more serious virtually regardless of 
the historical/archaeological evidence or naval engineering 
strength standards chosen . Even so, any potential strength 
loss could perhaps be mitigated by changes to other bracing 
located outboard of the thalamians and zygians and/or 
alternative arrangements of the adjacent lodging knees.
 As a wooden boatbuilder, wood scientist, systems 
thinker, and student of human nature, Lipke suggests that 
many factors would take precedent over unmeasurable and 
subtle torsional forces in the minds of classical shipwrights 
as they developed triremes using many vessels and years. 
Far more powerful and immediate feedback loops would 
be active in shaping shipwrights’ decisions such as a) 
the paramount importance of the apparent power, ease 
and physical demands (performance) of thousands of 
rowers, b) the comments of thousands of rowers and 
their commanders,c) the comments of hundreds of their 
professional colleagues, i.e. the ships’ carpenters, d) 
effectiveness in battle, e) shipworm damage, and f) plank 
leakage.
Bibliography
Coates, J. S., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988. Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea Trials  of 
Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Lipke, P . (1984) The Royal Ship of Cheops: a Retrospective 
Account of the Discovery, Restoration and Reconstruction, 
Based on Interviews with Hag Ahmed Youssef Moustafa. BAR 
International Series 225. Oxford, Archaeopress
Morrison, J. S and Coates, J. F . (eds) (1989) An Athenian T rireme 
Reconstructed. The British Sea Trials of Olympias, 1987 . 
BAR International Series 486. Oxford, Archaeopress.
Shaw, J. T. (ed.) (1993) The Trireme Project. Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.  Oxbow Monograph 
31. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F . and Rankov, N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd ed. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press.
===== PAGE 51 =====
Edited by Paul Lipke38
1.7. Suggestions for future research in the 
T rireme Project 
Paul Lipke and Ford Weiskittel
The new questions raised by the building and operation 
of Olympias are as important as the answers to old ones 
provided by sea trials. They identify areas deserving 
attention. In some cases, they indicate that an entirely 
new level of understanding about trireme operation has 
been reached as a result of the work to date. This section 
summarizes a few of the many remaining research areas that 
can be addressed both with and without further sea trials. 
1.7.1 Research in Olympias
1.7.1.1 Speed and manoeuvring
Difficulties with Olympias’ measuring equipment have 
been partially reported previously. New and repeated tests 
of speed and maneuvring are needed, both with the ship 
as is and with improved instrumentation on board. These 
tests will improve the statistical reliability of the project’s 
data as well as advance our understanding of the effective 
operation of triremes.
1.7.1.2 Drift speed
Additional measurement of the ship’s drift speeds at 
various headings relative to wind direction and strength 
are needed for the adjustment of earlier and future trials 
results, and to consider the difficulties of holding position 
before a battle.
1.7.1.3 Oar designs 
Performance and tests to date have indicated areas of 
improvement for oars at all three levels. New thalamian 
oars are needed especially to compensate for limitations 
in the currently possible gearing and water turbulence at 
higher rates of speed. A new design for these oars has been 
prepared by Timothy Shaw and John Coates, but tests 
with prototypes would be valuable before a full set of 54 
thalamian oars (plus spares) are ordered. 
1.7.1.4 Non-electronic communication
Experiments have been started by Boris Rankov and Ford 
Weiskittel in non-electronic communication between the 
keleustes and the oarcrew using voice, pipes and/or visual 
signals. Intra-ship communication is difficult. The noise 
of the oars, wind, intra-triad communication and the poor 
acoustics of a hull packed with 170 crew members make it 
difficult for commands to be heard throughout the ship, 
especially in the bow.
  Due to the brief nature of the trials and the intensive 
crew training needed, sea trials to date have been largely 
reliant on amplifying the rowing master’s voice so that 
he/she can be readily heard by the entire crew (especially 
in the first week.) Clearly electronic amplification was 
not available in antiquity. Furthermore, in close quarters 
or a battle situation, it is quite possible for unamplified 
commands from an adjacent ship to be more audible to 
those in the bow than those coming from the stern of 
their own vessel. 
  Communication without a sound system (using a pipe 
and/or a second officer standing further forward to relay 
commands to the bow) has proven to be possible and 
effective on numerous occasions. The intent should be 
to conduct future sea trials without using an electronic 
sound system except in the event of an emergency, and 
to experiment more with piped and visual signals. This 
will require the crew to memorize and be attentive to a 
trireme visual or ‘sign’ language.
1.7.1.5 Tholepin position
There is continuing controversy about whether a trireme 
can be safely and more effectively rowed with the oar 
aft of the thole pin. A series of modifications to the oar 
furniture have been designed by John Howarth to explore 
this further.
1.7.1.6 Sailing trials
The sailing performance of triremes, so essential to their 
effective deployment, could be explored fully through a 
set of trials specifically devoted to sailing. The Hellenic 
Navy’s lack of an official protocol for the operation of 
large sea -going sailing vessels, their uncertainties about 
this unusual ship’s sailing performance parameters, and 
other matters have limited sailing experimentation. A 
set of sailing trials, with a reduced crew of experienced 
sailor-rowers and water ballast strapped to the seats of 
missing crew members has been proposed by sailing master 
Douglas Lindsay.
Research without a ship
1.7.1.7 Mortise and tenon performance in ship hulls
Testing of mortise and tenon behaviour and strength 
during moisture cycling and with different configurations 
is needed along the lines of the limited tests presented (pp. 
189–90) especially considering the crucial importance of 
this technology. Model sections built of historically correct 
species, tested in a wood testing laboratory would greatly 
expand our understanding of the limits of triremes.
1.7.1.8 Behaviour in and destruction of hulls by shipworm
More research is required into the behaviour in and 
destruction of hulls by shipworm (T eredinidae) in mortise-
and-tenon fastened planking under various conditions 
of hull construction, wood species, hull coatings, drying 
cycles and the environment. 
1.7.1.9 Crew Physiology
Further testing of the physiology and bio -mechanics 
of rowing a trireme can be carried out using rowing 
ergonometers, heart monitors and equipment designed 
to measure volume of oxygen uptake.
===== PAGE 52 =====
1. Olympias 1992 Trials Report 39
1.7.1.10 Trireme design
The design and construction of inexpensive full-scale 
mock-ups (such as that built by the T rireme T rust USA 
for about $500) could be used to test trireme design 
hypotheses and modifications to the oar system. Scale 
working models and computer-aided design and analysis 
of the reconstruction can also improve ship performance 
and our understanding. Alternative hull configurations can 
be explored via CAD, although the usefulness of this tool 
is limited due to the inherent difficulty of modelling not 
only the hull but the three dimensional, biomechanical 
problems of the arrangement of the rowing furniture and 
oarcrew. 
  There is one potentially radical difference between 
Olympias and any future reconstruction that deserves 
schematic exploration at a minimum, and perhaps 
preliminary number-crunching. The concept was first 
raised as a question by Owain Roberts, who designed 
Olympias ’ sailing rig, was her first sailing master, 
and has since gone on to reconstruct rigging systems 
for the ‘awning’ over Rome’s Coliseum, for raising 
Egyptian monoliths, etc. Roberts suggests (personal 
communication, 1988) making the hypozoma (hogging 
truss) in two parts, one for each side, and raising the 
middle sections on stanchions (perhaps either side of 
the gangway) to improve its effective lift against the 
ship’s ends sagging. This might, in turn, allow greater 
thwartships separation between rowers on different levels, 
and permit a reduction in the ship’s beam, which is 
already dangerously close to the maximum space between 
columns in the shipsheds. 
1.7.1.11 Re-design and testing of oars 
There is a need for re-design and testing of oars using 
historically correct species, which will affect dimensions, 
stiffness, balance, and therefore performance.
1.8. A final note: falling victim to our own 
success
Paul Lipke and Ford Weiskittel
The author dares to suggest that the trireme project has 
become a victim of its own success. Much of the future 
research and design of any future reconstruction will 
require both new blood of a very high technical and 
academic quality, and a highly interdisciplinary, integrated 
design effort with a diverse design team, extending well 
beyond the efforts of the 1998 conference on ‘Lessons 
Learned.’ Here’s why. 
  T wo men, John Morrison and John Coates, whose 
combined talents were even more considerable than their 
intimidating individual brain power, spent many years 
researching and designing the reconstruction Olympias. 
Their work, supported by many others, has moved 
our understanding of the trireme to a level probably 
not seen since the classical age. It is truly remarkable 
achievement. 
  It also stands to reason that a design with such a 
pedigree is not easily invalidated, and alternative designs 
are rarely well enough developed or technically viable 
enough to compete with the present project’s standard, or 
to withstand the scrutiny of those who have been deeply 
immersed in Olympias. 
  Furthermore, this reconstruction has been placed in the 
hands of a highly competent, diverse, interdisciplinary crew 
(rowers and management alike) which has further advanced 
understanding to the point where no one can individually 
encompass all the learning and specialization. 
  If recent decades have taught society anything, it is that 
when it comes to thinking about complex systems, such as 
Olympias, all stakeholders must be engaged and involved 
for full understanding to emerge so that the project leaps 
to a much higher level. An interdisciplinary, integrated 
design effort is essential for any future reconstruction 
to justify such a vessel’s considerable construction and 
maintenance costs, and to provide the world with a leap 
forward in understanding of similar magnitude to that 
provided by Olympias.
===== PAGE 53 =====
2.  Olympias on the Thames, 1993
In  1993  Olympias  was  brought  to  the  River  Thames  in 
London to take part in a week of events organised by the 
Hellenic Cultural Centre in London to celebrate 2,500 
years  of  Greek  democracy  (dating  from  the  reforms  of 
Kleisthenes in 508/7 BC). The ship had been refurbished 
by  the  Hellenic  navy  at  a  cost  of  20  million  drachmas 
(£62,500),   and  was  transported   from  the  Piraeus   to 
Tilbury  on  her  own  specially-designed  cradle  aboard  a 
container  vessel,  M/V  Arma.  The  costs  of  the  visit,  an 
estimated £375,000 at 1993 prices, were borne by various 
organisations of the Greek and British governments and 
several  individual  sponsors  and  donors  from  the  Greek 
community in London.
  Olympias  left  Greece  in  May  and  was  offloaded  at 
Tilbury on Wednesday, 9th June. On the same day, she was 
towed upstream to West India Dock where, from Thursday, 
10th until Saturday, 12th June, she was put on display to 
the  public.  On  the  morning  of  Sunday,  13th  June,  she 
was towed upstream on the tide to Putney Pier, and on 
the same day the volunteer oarcrew (mainly British, but 
including several American trireme ‘veterans’) moved into 
their accommodation at Hounslow Cavalry Barracks.
  As a warship, Olympias could not be transferred when 
under  way  on  the  Thames  (as  a  merchant  vessel  would 
have been) to the direct control of a river pilot, and so 
remained throughout under the command of her Hellenic 
Navy captain, Lt Mavrikis, assisted by a ten-strong Hellenic 
Navy  deck  crew  as  in  previous  sea  trials.  Nevertheless, 
because  of  the  problems  of  navigating  a  relatively  large 
vessel  on  narrow  reaches  of  a  tidal  river  spanned  by 
several bridges, river pilot Chris Livett was aboard in an 
advisory capacity for all outings. Also aboard throughout 
was Commander Stavros Platis, HN, who had overseen 
the ship’s construction in Greece.
  Since the purpose of the visit was educational, diplomatic 
and  celebratory,  no  actual  trials  were  planned,  and  the 
slightly under-strength volunteer crew had only a few days 
to practise before the main ceremonies. The first outing 
took place on the morning of Monday, 14th June (High 
Tide at Putney: 10.36; Low Tide: 16.19), when the ship 
Boris Rankov
was rowed from Putney Pier up the Oxford-Cambridge 
Boat  Race  course  towards  Hammersmith   Bridge  (1½ 
miles),  back  down  to  the  Mile  Post,  and  then  back  up 
to Hammersmith. Olympias did not, of course, have her 
masts  stepped  or  on  board  because  of  the  bridges,  but 
the state of the tide left only about one foot of clearance 
between  the  top  of  the  aphlaston at  the  stern  and  the 
girders  on  the  underside  of  Hammersmith  Bridge.  The 
ship was inched up to and through the bridge under oar, 
and this and earlier demonstrations of the ship’s turning 
circle convinced Chris Livett that the ship could be safely 
manoeuvred on the Tideway, as the tidal reaches of the 
Thames are known. She was then rowed upstream as far 
as  Chiswick  Eyot  before  turning  and  covering  the  2½ 
miles back to Putney; the outing was of about 6 miles in 
total. In the afternoon, during a second outing, the ship 
was  rowed  downstream  through  Putney,  Wandsworth, 
Battersea, Albert and Vauxhall Bridges, and then back up 
through the bridges to Putney again, a round-trip of about 
8 miles.
  The following day, T uesday, 15th June (High Tide at 
Putney: 11.37; Low Tide: 17.42), was John Morrison’s 80th 
birthday. In the morning outing, because the tide was too 
high for Olympias to pass under the bridges, she was rowed 
from Putney to Hammersmith and back twice, a total of 
6 miles. In the afternoon, with the tide ebbing, she was 
rowed up through Hammersmith Bridge to Chiswick Eyot 
and back to Putney, a round trip of 5 miles (Fig. 2.1).
  Between  outings  on  Monday  and T uesday,  Dr  Peter 
Jones  of  Friends  of  the  Classics  had  arranged  for  some 
300  members   of  that  organization,   including   many 
distinguished Classicists, to visit the ship at Putney Pier. 
They  were  taken  aboard  and  shown  round  the  ship  in 
groups  of  about  20  at  a  time  by  John  Morrison  and 
the present writer, some having queued for up to three 
hours. A particularly distinguished visitor, who was able 
to stay aboard for one of the outings, was Professor Lionel 
Casson, whose published work on ancient seafaring had 
proved invaluable during the early stages of the design of 
Olympias. 
===== PAGE 54 =====
2. Olympias on the Thames, 1993 41
  The  first   major   event   of  the  visit   took  place   on 
Wednesday, 16th June (High Tide at Putney: 12.34; Low 
Tide at London Bridge 19.50). Because of the heavy rain, 
the  planned  morning  outing  was  cancelled,  and  in  the 
afternoon the ship was rowed 7 miles downstream through 
Putney, Wandsworth, Battersea, Albert, Chelsea, Vauxhall 
and Lambeth Bridges. After a tricky turn, during which 
the ship narrowly avoided being swept onto the piers of 
Westminster Bridge by the ebb, which was running at 4–5 
knots, she was moored on a pontoon alongside the Albert 
Embankment  and  opposite  the  Houses  of  Parliament. 
Here, the Speaker of the House of Commons, the Right 
Honourable   Betty  Boothroyd,   PC,  MP  came  aboard 
together with the Greek Minister of Culture, Mrs Dora 
Bakoyannis, and the Senior Officer of the Hellenic Navy. 
Following  a  presentation,  they  were  shown  round  the 
ship, and the Speaker was elected an honorary member 
of the crew and presented with a T rireme T rust T-shirt. 
Afterwards,  a  replica  of  the  stele  bearing  the  Eucrates 
decree of 337/6 BC asserting the principle of democracy 
together with an image of  Demokratia crowning Demos 
(‘the People’), was presented to the Speaker on the Terrace 
of the House of Commons; in addition, the Speaker was 
presented with the Silver Medal of the Aegean Maritime 
Museum, whose President, Mr George Dracopoulos, had 
been one of the main sponsors of the visit. Meanwhile, the 
ship was rowed up past the Houses of Parliament and then 
turned and then rowed another 3½ miles downstream on 
the ebb, again narrowly avoiding the piers of Westminster 
Bridge and then continuing through Waterloo, Blackfriars, 
Southwark,  London  and Tower  Bridges.  There  she  was 
turned and then taken to her mooring for the night at 
HMS President downstream of Tower Bridge.
  The  next  day,  Thursday,  17th  June  (High  Tide  at 
London Bridge: 12.42; Low Tide: 19.00) was also a day 
of display and ceremonial. In the morning, the masts were 
taken  on  board  and  stepped,  and  the  yards  raised.  The 
bascules of Tower Bridge were raised to allow the ship to 
be rowed through upstream and were then lowered behind 
her. Olympias carried on up to London Bridge where she 
turned to wait for the bascules of T ower Bridge to be raised 
again. At this point, the sailing master, Douglas Lindsay, 
asked the captain for permission to lower the sails, and 
when  the  bascules  were  raised  Olympias  sailed  through. 
This turned out to be a unique event, since Lindsay was 
later  informed  by  the  chairman  of  the  Port  of  London 
Authority that passing through Tower Bridge under sail 
had been forbidden ever since the bridge was completed 
in 1894. The ship then returned to HMS President where 
her masts were unstepped and unshipped. In the afternoon, 
Mrs  Bakoyannis  came  aboard  with  the  Deputy  Mayor 
of Athens, the Senior Officer of the Hellenic Navy, and 
Greek Orthodox Archbishop Gregorios of Thyateira and 
Great Britain, who blessed the ship with Holy Water. The 
Figure 2.1. Olympias being rowed upstream on the Thames towards Hammersmith Bridge on Tuesday, 15th June, 1993 (Photo: 
Rosie Randolph/Trireme Trust).
===== PAGE 55 =====
Boris Rankov42
ship was then rowed upstream through Tower Bridge to 
Upper Tower Bridge Pier, where the distinguished guests 
were welcomed by the Lord Mayor of London, Sir Francis 
McWilliams, GBE, who in return received the Silver Medal 
of the Aegean Maritime Museum. The crew then rowed 
the ship up through London Bridge and back down again 
past the guests to HMS President. It had originally been 
intended that the ship should be rowed back to Putney. 
However, as a result of a low spring tide on the T uesday 
night, the ship had come close to grounding at Putney 
Pier, so it was decided that she should remain at HMS 
President for the rest of the visit.
  The results of this enforced change of plan were that 
the ship was no longer as visible or accessible to the public 
as she had been at Putney, and that the oarcrew now had 
to travel for 2½ hours each way to reach the ship from 
Hounslow Barracks instead of the 1 hour it had taken to 
Putney. This effectively curtailed further outings, although 
she  was  rowed  upstream  on  the  afternoon  of  Sunday, 
20th  June  (Low  Tide  at  London  Bridge:  09.09;  High 
Tide:  14.59;  Low Tide  21.39)  from  HMS  President  to 
the HMS Chrysanthemum mooring on the North Bank at 
Victoria Embankment, between Waterloo and Blackfriars 
Bridges, so that the crew could join the Democracy 2500 
party on the South Bank. After the party, she was rowed 
back down to HMS President, from where she was towed 
back to Tilbury the next day, Monday, 21st June, and then 
shipped back to Greece.
  An abiding memory of the visit for the crew was the 
persistent rain, which fell on every day of the visit except 
T uesday  and  Sunday,  and  which  dripped  through  the 
canopy deck and left the rowers permanently drenched; 
this  was  not  an  experience  any  of  the  trireme  veterans 
had  had  in  Greece.  The  demands  of  ceremonial   and 
publicity,  coupled  with  the  problems  of  navigating  on 
the busy Tideway, meant that no actual trials were even 
contemplated. Research activities were limited to making 
bio-mechanical measurements, testing the use of double 
pipe (aulos) for timekeeping, and an experiment with the 
oars. The measurements, using a special frame designed by 
Ford Weiskittel continued those begun during the 1992 
sea-trails to collect data on movement and length of stroke 
during fixed-seat rowing. The aulos was a reconstruction 
of an ancient, reeded double-pipe, based on an example 
from the Temple of Artemis at Brauron and other finds 
in the British Museum and the National Archaeological 
Museum at Athens, and made by naval architects Professor 
Doug Pattison, Roy Collins and Stelios Psaroudakes from 
University  College,  London.  Unfortunately,  as  with  a 
previous reconstruction produced for the 1988 sea-trials 
by the Department of Music at University of California, 
Berkeley, the experiment was not a success since conditions 
made the pipes largely inaudible. Finally, a large-bladed 
thranite oar was tried in a thalamian seat, and a narrower, 
thalmian oar in a thranite seat; both were found to work 
perfectly   well,  which  suggests   that  there  is  scope  for 
experimentation with different blade shapes and sizes at 
all three levels.
  There  were  also  some  incidental   discoveries.   The 
incessant  rain  ensured  that  the  electronic  loudspeaker 
system failed, as it had done in 1988, and once again it 
was found that the ship could be effectively controlled by 
the rowing masters, Ford Wesikittel and the present writer, 
giving simultaneous instructions from the bow and stern 
respectively (see Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 255). 
It was striking, however, how greatly this was facilitated by 
the absence of masts. This was the first and only occasion 
on which Olympias was rowed with the masts unstepped 
and left ashore. Without their encumbrance, it was much 
easier for the rowing masters to see each other clearly, move 
up and down the ship, and make themselves heard to the 
crew. This undoubtedly helps to explain why masts were 
normally put ashore before battle in antiquity (Thucydides 
7.24.2; Xenophon Hellenica 2.1.9; 6.2.27; Plutarch Life 
of Antony 64.2; Dio Cassius 50.33.5; cf. Polybius 1.61.1; 
Livy 36.44.2–3).
  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  the  visit’s  greatest 
value lay in its publicity impact. The ship’s outings were 
reported  daily  in  the  British  press  and  on  Greek  and 
British television, as well as further afield. Many thousands 
of  people  watched  the  ship  under  oar  from  the  banks 
of  the  Thames,  and  public  interest  in  the  ship  and  in 
Greek  antiquity  in  general  was  raised  significantly.  The 
involvement of the Speaker and the House of Commons 
in  the  celebration  of  Greek  democracy  was  also  a  clear 
diplomatic success ahead of Athens’ (eventually abortive) 
bid for the 1996 Olympics. The 1993 excursion to London 
remains the only occasion to date on which Olympias has 
travelled  outside  Greece,  but  provides  an  indication  of 
how  popular  and  effective  such  good-will  visits  by  the 
ship could be. 
Bibliography
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F ., and Rankov, N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  Cambridge 
University Press.
===== PAGE 56 =====
3. Report of the 1994 Sea T rials  
of the T rireme Olympias 
Timothy Shaw
Introduction
The sea trials of Olympias were resumed off the island of 
Poros, Greece, in July 1994.
 These were the sixth in the series arranged by The 
T rireme T rust with the much-appreciated co-operation of 
the Hellenic Navy and the Greek Government. The main 
purposes of these trials were educational and scientific: 
educational, in giving young people a practical insight 
into some aspects of life as it may have been lived in 
classical antiquity; and scientific, in that the oarcrews 
recruited by The T rireme T rust were asked to perform 
tests contributing towards a better understanding of the 
design and the capabilities of ancient triremes and oared 
ships generally. The main purpose of this report is to draw 
attention to new findings arising from the 1994 trials: it 
is not an outing-by-outing account of them.
Organisation of the trials
Matters of a routine nature coming under this heading 
were covered in Newsletter No. 13 of The T rireme T rust, 
which gives extensive acknowledgements and names the 
principal officers acting for The T rireme T rust.
The T rireme T rust’s crew
The pulling master was Andrew Taylor.
 As the leaders of The T rireme T rust USA did not recruit 
a contingent, the 1994 crew consisted predominantly of 
English men and women. A handful of Americans did 
come and they were most welcome. Although about as 
many English people were recruited as in any previous 
trials except the first, the lack of a numerous American 
contingent was felt in that the number of people rowing 
at any time scarcely exceeded 120, whereas a full oarcrew 
numbers 170. The shortfall was regrettable but it did not 
prevent some useful results from being obtained.
Condition of the ship and oars
Although leakage was negligible, the condition of the 
hull gave cause for remark as the ‘hog’ had increased. 
Details obtained by Andrew Taylor were notified to John 
Coates, who made appropriate recommendations to the 
Greek authorities. The ‘hog’ together with the lightening 
of the ship caused by the shortfall of about 50 rowers, 
made it harder for some of the rowers amidships to cover 
their blades. Putting ballast on board to counter this was 
considered but not carried out. When the mainsail was 
briefly lowered it was seen to need some repairs. The 
‘boat’ sail was not lowered and so its condition remained 
unknown to the T rust. The standing and running rigging 
appeared to be all right. The flotation bags, air bottles and 
fire extinguishers were present.
 There were enough oars in usable condition for the 
crew of about 120 rowers. Inevitably a few of the original 
oars, 7 years old by the time of the trials, were broken as 
they were in each year of trials. It was clear that some new 
thranite and zygian oars would be needed the next time a 
full crew was recruited, and as had been pointed out before, 
it would be helpful if the thalamian oars were superseded 
by oars more like those of the two upper levels.
A “new” knot 
Perhaps the most intriguing discovery during the 1994 
trials was that of a “new” knot – new to the T rireme T rust, 
that is – for tying the oars to the tholepins. A photograph 
of the knot is given as Fig. 3.1. The knot was demonstrated 
to Dick Farmer by a descendant of a long line of Greek 
fisherfolk, who had visited Olympias and had noticed that 
our oarloops were “wrongly tied”.
 Doug Lindsay has described how to tie the new knot:
[The method] calls for a slightly longer thole strap – about 
one fathom long. Tie a stopper knot in one end. Working 
from that stopper knot, held close to the oar and tholepin 
directly in front of the tyer, take three turns round oar and 
pin, with the underturn inboard of the tholepin so as not 
===== PAGE 57 =====
Timothy Shaw44
to choke the oar, come up from behind and take a round 
turn round the stopper knot. From this round turn, lead 
the tail under the upper part of the three round turns, 
and make this into a half hitch enclosing the three loops. 
Pulled tight, it makes a positive knot which is readily 
adjustable, but allows the three loops to self-equalise the 
strain on them. A thinner rope, probably no more than 8 
mm, will be adequate. Apparently this knot has been used 
by the locals for generations. I tried it on my oar for the 
last couple of days of trials, and it performed well.
Although Homer refers to leather thongs for tying oars 
to tholepins, they have not so far proved satisfactory in 
Olympias, rope grommets being much better. Leather 
might be strong enough, however, if used in the way now 
disclosed, and this ought to be tried in any future trials.
Instrumentation
Rates of striking were measured by means of a ‘rating’ 
watch using a four-stroke count. The speed of the ship 
was measured by means of a T rimble Ensign Portable 
Global Position System or GPS which assessed the ship’s 
rate of change of position by reference to various artificial 
satellites above the Earth. On the whole the device worked 
well and there is no need to doubt that its readings were 
reasonably accurate except when interference was caused 
by walkie-talkie transmitters on board.
Summary of the tests
The programme of tests described below may fairly be 
criticised as unambitious. Professor Morrison had obtained 
from the Greek Admiralty permission for a much fuller 
programme involving sailing as well as a long-distance 
row, but the Captain of Olympias exercised his discretion 
and disallowed some of the intended tests.
 The tests are described in the order: tests in the barracks, 
tests in the ship, tests of oars.
T ests in the barracks
In order to throw more light on the internal layout 
of triremes, with particular reference to the currently-
accepted interscalmium of 0.98 m, the programme called 
for measurements of the power, weight, stature, reach and 
fore-and-aft space occupancy of members of the oarcrew. 
The rowers are thanked for their co-operation. The results 
showed – inter alia – that the average height of our women 
rowers, 168 cm, happened to be very close to that reported 
for ancient Greek men, 167 cm (see for example Shaw 
1993, 64). Accordingly it is important to note that when 
our women rowers were at their full forward reach, which 
incidentally gave an average stroke length of 1.04 m, the 
fore-and-aft space they occupied when ready for the catch, 
measured at the level of their knuckles, averaged 0.99 m. 
A similar test conducted in the ship and commented on 
below confirmed and extended these results.
T ests in the ship
A test of the space occupancy of a number of the starboard 
side thranites was conducted. All the starboard side thranite 
seats from the stern to about the mainmast were occupied 
and the men and women in them were asked to swing 
forward with arms stretched until they touched the next 
person, whilst keeping the blades out of the water by a 
few inches. Fig. 3.2, which is typical, shows Steve Strong 
in seat 20 during the test. His right hand overlaps the 
next man’s back, inboard of it. This was possible because 
of the oar’s inboard length and its obliquity, and of course 
it reflects the fact that the interscalmium in Olympias is 
only 0.888 m. If Steve and the next man aft continued to 
occupy the same fore-and-aft spaces just before the catch 
in a ship with an interscalmium of 0.98 m, the clearance 
between them would be 9.2 cm. Clearance is important 
because if crew members are to row long, hard strokes 
they need to be sure they will not be hit in the back even 
occasionally, let alone on almost every catch. A calculation 
is given in Appendix 1 to show that even a clearance of 
15 cm. would be insufficient to cover errors of timing 
of 0.1 second at the catch, at top speed. Also, the writer 
considers that to rival ancient cruising speeds a modern 
crew would have to reach a little further forward than was 
possible for Steve Strong in Olympias; this would of course 
reduce the clearance unless the layout of the oar-rig were 
altered from that of Olympias to allow a rower’s oarhandle, 
when nearest the stern, to pass alongside and outboard of 
the trunk of the next rower aft. On the evidence from our 
women, this would apply to triremes manned by ancient 
Figure 3.1. The “new” knot for tying oars to tholes; the stopper 
knot has been pulled clear, for clarity (Photo: Nan Shaw).
===== PAGE 58 =====
3. Report of the 1994 Sea Trials of the Trireme Olympias 45
Greek men. A plan view showing roughly what is meant 
is given as Fig. 3.3.
 The stroke length implied by ancient cruising speeds is 
discussed in Appendix 3.
 As in previous years the oarcrew was divided into sections 
each under a team leader who acted as the coach of his 
or her section under the general direction of the pulling 
master. T wenty outings were planned. Three were cancelled 
and others were terminated early because of the wind.
 The rowing trials confirmed the practicality of rowing 
the ship with one level of rowers missing, i.e. not even 
sitting there as ballast, but on the whole the rowing was 
weak. Not surprisingly, no great speed was obtained, the 
highest speed indicated by the GPS being 7.1 knots in a 
tailwind. It was held for a few seconds only.
 It was confirmed that the thranite and zygian oars can 
be used without difficulty in the thalamian level, and that 
they enable the thalamians to work harder than they can 
with their usual oars.
 An unhistorical feature of the trials to date has been 
the use of loudspeakers to convey the pulling master’s 
instructions to the oarcrew. The speakers have been a 
great help particularly during a crew’s first few outings, 
and 1994 was no exception. However it has always been 
desirable to try working without them, and in 1994 
Andrew Taylor devised a method of giving certain orders 
silently by means of hand signals, which were relayed to 
the rowers near the bows by Acoris Andipa. This worked 
well with 120 people. This experiment should be repeated 
with a full crew in any future trials. Whilst orders may 
sometimes have been communicated silently in antiquity it 
remains not unlikely that at other times orders were given 
by means of a pipe known as a bosun’s ‘Call’. Here it may 
be recalled that Douglas Pattison (at that time Professor 
of Naval Architecture at University College, London) 
demonstrated replica auloi (pipes) on board Olympias in 
London in 1993.
 Very little sailing was permitted, and then only in such 
light winds that nothing new was learnt.
T ests of oars
Measurements of the moment of inertia and other features 
of ten oars were made on land as a contribution to the 
improvement of trireme oar design. No thalamian oar was 
measured as the existing thalamian oars of Olympias are 
regarded as obsolete. The reasons for this are explained in 
The Trireme Project. In 1990 The T rireme T rust had nine 
new oars made of spruce to a light design for comparison 
with the modified original oars, which are made of Douglas 
fir. Seven of the spruce oars were brought to Poros in 1994 
and they were measured alongside one old thranite and 
two old zygian oars. All these oars were 4.22 m long, i.e. 
9½ cubits of 0.444 m.
 The measurements led to a suggested specification for 
trireme oars of the enhanced length of 4.66 m, i.e. 9½ cubits 
of 0.49 m. This is given in Appendix 2, below the details 
of the other oars. It is recommended that one 4.66 m oar 
should be made from spruce for experimental purposes.
Published papers
In 1993 John Coates and Timothy Shaw each presented a 
Figure 3.2. Steve Strong (thranite) rowing in seat 20 of Olympias in 1994 (Photo: Nan Shaw).
===== PAGE 59 =====
Timothy Shaw46
paper at one of the Spring Meetings of the Royal Institution 
of Naval Architects. Both papers were illustrated by 
drawings by John Coates. The papers were well received, 
and each was followed by a lively discussion. The papers 
and discussions were published in different volumes of the 
transactions as follows:
Coates, J. F . (1994) The Naval Architecture of European 
Oared Ships. Transactions of the Royal Institution of Naval 
Architects, Part B 136, 175–187
Shaw, J. T . (1993) Rowing in Ships and Boats . Transactions 
of the Royal Institution of Naval Architects, Part B 135, 
211–224.
John Coates introduced his paper as follows: “After a brief 
summary of their history and operational characteristics, 
some of the main aspects of the naval architecture of 
European oared ships are discussed, centred upon two 
types of particular historical importance [These were 
the Athenian trireme of the 4th century BC and the 
Mediterranean light galley of the 16th century AD]. This 
paper is concerned with the effects of oarsystems upon 
the design, construction and performance of the ships 
for which they were built. It does not enter into the more 
general aspects of hulls and rigs on which many books 
have been written. To keep within the confines of one 
paper, discussion of many features of these ships has had 
to be omitted, in particular armament, rig, manoeuvring 
and accommodation.”
 The main headings of John’s paper are: Introduction; A 
Summary Historical Perspective: Oared Ship Operations: 
Design (Oarpower, Hull Wetted Area and Speed under 
Oar: Seaworthiness and Speed under Sail; Freeboard and 
Oar Length: Multi-Rower Oars; Freeboard and Stability: 
(Constructional Limits); Hull Life, Building Time and 
Leakage; Acknowledgements.
 Timothy Shaw set out to provide the theoretical 
understanding of rowing geometry, oar mechanics and 
oarsmanship that is needed alongside other knowledge if 
the performance of ancient oared ships is to be understood. 
He has summarised his paper as follows: “The paper 
discusses the oar-rig of certain oared ships and boats in 
which each oar is pulled by one man who looks aft (or 
roughly aft) and is seated. The efficiency and endurance of 
the human engine are stated and formulae are developed 
enabling the mean efficiency of the oars of a particular 
racing eight to be assessed. This leads to an estimate of the 
efficiency of the oars of the reconstructed trireme Olympias 
which has an oarcrew numbering up to 170. The effects 
on oar efficiency of variables such as crew’s power and 
ship’s resistance are evaluated. Some space is devoted to a 
reconsideration of a paper on the propulsive efficiency of 
Figure 3.3. Plan view of Olympias oar-rig altered to allow the oarhandle to pass alongside and outboard of the trunk of the next 
rower aft (Drawing: J. T . Shaw).
===== PAGE 60 =====
3. Report of the 1994 Sea Trials of the Trireme Olympias 47
rowing, published by the Institution in 1927. The paper 
also contains a short section on the training and control 
of large oarcrews, a lost art now being rediscovered”. In his 
reply to the Discussion Timothy analysed the merits of a 
long reach for the catch and those of obtaining the finish 
by pulling on the oarhandle rather than the footstraps.
Theoretical work
Discussions on the layout of the oar-rig of any future 
reconstructions of a trireme continued in the light of the 
studies of the space occupancy of members of the 1994 crew 
and of the proved effectiveness of the strongly canted and 
offset oar-rig of fast Cornish gigs. These can reach a speed 
of 8 knots although they have only 6 rowers. There may 
thus be merit in similarly canting and offsetting the oar-rig 
of a trireme. If such a layout could be fitted into a suitable 
hull it would seem to overcome the restriction of stroke 
length otherwise associated with the (still) relatively short 
interscalmium of 0.98 m now thought to be characteristic 
of triremes. With this in mind, the relationship between 
stroke length and some other parameters implied by a 
cruising speed of 7½ knots is investigated in Appendix 
3, and the suggestion is developed in the writer’s three 
papers elsewhere in this volume.
Appendix 1
Clearance at the catch and errors of timing  
at top speed
For this calculation some assumptions have to be made. 
Those chosen are as follows: Top speed is 9.7 knots (say 
5.00 m/s), the effective stroke length at the butt is 0.99 
m (see Appendix 3 for this), ⅔ of the angle swept by an 
oar outboard is forward of an athwartships line through 
the tholepin (thus the angle of attack, when seen in plan, 
is 90 degrees minus ⅔ of the swept angle when the latter 
is projected onto a horizontal plane); and the oar is 2½ 
cubits (1.225 m) long inboard of the pin, 7 cubits (3.43 m) 
long outboard of it. Also the instantaneous turning point 
of the oar with respect to undisturbed water is taken to 
be a little way up the shaft from the neck, say 0.60 m 
from the tip and so 2.83 m from the pin, and once the 
blade is covered a man’s oarbutt is at the same level as his 
shoulders, or nearly so, the catch is taken with straight 
arms, and the seats and stretchers are laid out parallel to 
the keel or nearly so.
 If the oar slopes at 30 degrees to the horizontal in the 
conditions given above, the angle of attack is 52.9 degrees.
 The fore-and-aft component of the momentary rate of 
the movement of the butt of the oar relative to the ship 
is then given by:
(1.225/2.83)(5.00)sin²(52.9); this is 1.38m/s
and this will be the speed of movement of the man’s 
shoulders rearwards if he swings straight along a line 
parallel to the keel. If this speed remained constant it 
would follow that a distance of 0.15 m would be traversed 
in 0.109 seconds; but actually the speed will increase. A 
distance of 0.15 m at the butt implies a swept angle of 
7.0 degrees i.e. the angle of attack has increased to 59.9 
degrees, and if the other conditions are unchanged, the 
shoulder speed will be 1.62 m/s. Actually it will be a little 
more as the instantaneous turning point will have moved 
a little nearer the thole. It is clear that if a rower is late by 
one tenth of a second in catching the water at the angle 
given here ( i.e. about 53 degrees) the rower next aft will 
certainly be hit in the back if the designed clearance is only 
0.15 m. The reader may modify the calculation to show 
the effect at other speeds, stroke lengths and so on.
Appendix 2
Physical properties of oars
Details of three oars of Douglas fir and seven oars of 
spruce are given below. The spruce oars were designed by 
John Coates in consultation with the writer as a result of 
experience with the original oars of Douglas fir during 
the 1987 and 1988 trials. They were made by F . Collar of 
Oxford, belong to The T rireme T rust and were first used in 
1990. Modification of the Douglas fir oars was completed 
during the 1990 trials.
 In 1994 the radii of gyration, the moments of inertia 
about the thole and the positions of the centres of 
percussion of the ten oars were obtained by experiments 
using a stopwatch and a bifilar suspension (for details of 
the method see Lamb 1923, 158–9, 164). 
 C of G = centre of gravity
 The weight “in hand” is calculated as though it acted at 
the butt, from the overall weight, the inboard length and 
the distance of the C of G from the thole. The inboard 
length is taken to be 3ft 7 ins. (1.092 m) in all cases. This 
dimension was found by the users of spruce oars to be the 
most convenient in Olympias.
 MIT = the moment of inertia about the thole, a measure 
of handiness.
 X = the distance of the centre of percussion from the 
tip of the blade. A positive sign indicates that the centre 
of percussion is beyond the tip. According to Bourne, the 
best position for it is within the blade about 6 inches, say 
15 cm, from the tip, i.e. X = -.15m (Bourne 1925).
 The main results are given in Table 3.I.
 The old oars and spruce oars nos. 1 and 2 have squared 
looms. The others have looms of circular cross-section. 
The old oars had been modified by the Hellenic Navy in 
accordance with the requirements of John Coates, but the 
superiority of the spruce oars is clear. It can be concluded 
that spruce oars 4.66 m long (i.e. built in accordance with 
a cubit of 0.49 m) could be given a satisfactorily low MIT. 
They could weigh as little as 10 lbf, perhaps less, and as 
shown below their MIT might be kept as low as 8 kg-m². 
The adequate rigidity of the existing 4.22 m spruce oars 
when used by the strongest oarsmen in the 1990 trials gives 
reason to believe that the 4.66 m oars would not be too 
===== PAGE 61 =====
Timothy Shaw48
flexible. The lengthwise dimensions and other desirable 
properties of a spruce oar 9½ cubits of 0.49 m long can 
now be specified:
Suggested specification of a spruce oar  
4.66 m long
Weight overall: 4.5 kgf (i.e. about 10 lbf)
Weight ‘in hand’ (at the butt): 2.0 kgf (say 4½ lbf)
Gearing 2.8 ( i.e. 2½ cubits inboard, 7 cubits outboard; 
this gearing is suitable for fast rowing on fixed seats, and 
does not entail too steeply-inclined a thranite oar)
From the foregoing, it follows that the centre of gravity 
must be 0.544 m outboard of the fulcrum and distant 
2.886 m from the tip of the blade. Now if the centre 
of percussion is to be within the blade 0.15 m from the 
tip it must be 2.736 m from the C of G. From physical 
principles this distance times that between the C of G and 
the fulcrum defines the square of the radius of gyration 
of the oar which is therefore 2.736 × 0.544 i.e. 1.488. 
Our experience with the 4.22 m oars indicates that this 
should be attainable with 4.66 m oars by careful attention 
to the taper of the shafts and looms, to the blade area 
and thickness and so on. The moment of inertia about 
the thole would then be 4.5 (1.488 + 0.544²) i.e. about 
8 kg-m². Such an outcome would be most satisfactory. 
It is recommended that an oar as near as possible to this 
specification be built for test.
Appendix 3
Cruising at 7½ knots: a note on the implications for 
stroke length and oar-rig layout
The best evidence we have for the cruising speed of fast 
triremes is the statement by Xenophon that a trireme 
under oar could reach Heraclea from Byzantium in “a long 
day” (see my paper ‘From the Golden Horn to Heraclea’ 
elsewhere in this volume). The least distance between these 
points, ignoring currents, is about 129 nautical miles. As 
explained in The Trireme Project, it looks as if a speed of 7½ 
knots or a trifle more will fit the facts (Shaw 1993, 64).
 By applying elementary trigonometry and one or 
two acceptable assumptions it is possible to deduce a 
quantitative relationship between length of stroke, slip 
of the oarblades, overall length and gearing of the oars, 
stroke rate, rhythm factor and speed. One cubit (0.49 m) 
appears to be a reasonable least value for the fore-and aft 
slip at the tip of a skilfully-rowed trireme oar; it implies 
an efficiency of the oars (inertia losses being neglected) of 
about 0.8 which is not likely to be improved on. If modern 
oarsmen are anything to go by, the greatest stroke length 
of which ancient Greek men 167 cm tall, rowing on fixed 
thwarts, were capable if unrestricted by their rig, was about 
1.1 m, measured at the butt; however since 10% of this 
was probably taken up by lost motion at the ends of the 
stroke, the effective (i.e. powered) length would probably 
have been about 0.99m. But if the rig was not appreciably 
canted and offset, the powered stroke length possible within 
an interscalmium of 0.98m would have been restricted to 
about 0.87 m, as the total movement would be no greater 
than the interscalmium even if the clearance were as little 
as 0.15 m; and the end losses would be the same, 0.11 m, 
as with the longer stroke. These two butt-end movements, 
0.99 m and 0.87 m, are considered in what follows.
 If the speed is 7½ knots and the fore-and-aft slip is 
0.49 m and the oars are 4.66 m long with a gearing of 
2.8, and ⅔ of the swept angle occurs forward of the pin, 
the relationship between stroke length, stroke rate and 
rhythm factor in the region of interest can be tabulated 
as shown in the first three columns of Table 3.2 reading 
from the left.
 The ratio of rhythm factors at a given stroke rate is 
1.17 which is the ratio of distances travelled by the ship 
during the effective pull.
 If at 32 spm the rhythm factor were kept at 3.21 while 
the effective stroke length was reduced from 0.99 m to 0.87 



 









 

       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       

       
       
       
T able 3.1
===== PAGE 62 =====
3. Report of the 1994 Sea Trials of the Trireme Olympias 49
m, the speed would fall. It could be restored to 7½ knots 
by raising the stroke rate by a factor of 1.17 to 37.4 spm. 
Similar reasoning can be applied to the other cases.
 If the effective stroke length were reduced from 0.99 
m to 0.87 m but the stroke rate, rhythm factor and slip 
were unchanged the speed could be restored to 7½ knots 
only by altering the gearing from 2.8 to 3.18. The ratio of 
these is (nearly) 99/87. Judging by our experience during 
the design of existing spruce oars, any increase in gearing 
beyond 2.8 would bring proportionate difficulties over 
the balance of the oar.
 In all these cases the mean power the crew must apply 
to the ship, called the mean effective power, is the same 
because the speed of the ship is the same; but because 
of differences in stroke rate and rhythm factor the mean 
couples the rowers have to apply to their oars will differ, 
as exemplified in the fourth and fifth columns of Table 
II. If the resistance of the ship at 7½ knots (3.86 m/s) 
is that of Olympias at that speed, say 3100 newtons, the 
mean effective power (averaged over the duration of the 
pull plus the run) is 3100 × 3.86 i.e. 11966 W or say 12.0 
kW: each oar must therefore exert 70.6 W on the ship, 
on a continuous average, or 70.6f W averaged during the 
effective pull only, where f is the rhythm factor. Rhythm 
factor is defined as:
the duration of the pull plus run
the duration of the effective pull
To calculate the couple we need to know the gross power 
applied to each oarhandle. It is greater than the effective 
power because the blade must shift water in order to 
create the necessary reaction, and the oar’s inertia has to 
be overcome. The gross power can be obtained to a good 
approximation as follows.
 To the quantity of 70.6f W the rower must add about a 
further 25% on account of the water shifted by the blade, 
and an amount of about 0.004r² on account of the oar’s 
inertia, r being the stroke rate. Thus the gross power that 
the rower must exert on the oarhandle, averaged over the 
duration of the effective pull is about:
1.25 × 70.6f + 0.004r² watts
The mean couple or mean bending stress that the rower 
applies to the oar during the pull is given by the mean 
gross power divided by the mean angular velocity of the 
oar relative to the ship during the effective pull. (This 
implies a suitable definition of ‘mean’). The couples are 
given in columns 4 and 5 of Table 3.2. From this table 
some advantages of longer strokes at any given stroke rate 
are evident: they would put less stress on oars, oarloops 
and tholepins; by the same token they would require less 
pull from the rower, and less immersed blade area. These 
may prove to be critical advantages.
 The premises underlying the calculation imply a mean 
angular velocity for the oar, during the effective pull, of 
1.42 radians per second for the stroke length 0.99 m, 
differing only slightly from that for the length of 0.87 m, 
which is 1.45 radians per second. Note that because the 
mean angular velocity for each stroke length is independent 
of stroke rate and rhythm factor, the immersed blade area 
must increase with rhythm factor in order to generate 
sufficient reaction. This may have implications for the 
static and dynamic balance of the oar.
 Having outlined the various options, and mentioned the 
importance of clearance, the writer invites suggestions as to 
the choice of length, stroke rate and rhythm most likely to 
have enabled a fast trireme to sustain 7½ knots for hours 
on end. He would merely add that if he has assumed too 
little slip on the blades, he has underestimated the stroke 
rate required at any particular length and rhythm.
 The mean couple expresses the mean bending stress on 
the oar at the thole. The couple varies during a stroke, its 
greatest value being considerably higher than the mean.
Acknowledgements and thanks
The Global Positioning System was hired from Regis 
Electronics. King’s School, Canterbury is thanked for the 
loan of ergometers (contact: Mr. Richard Hooper).
Bibliography
Bourne, G. C. (1925) A T extbook of Oarsmanship. Oxford, 
Oxford University Press.
Lamb, H. (1923) Dynamics. 2nd ed. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press.
Shaw, J. T . (ed.) (1993) The Trireme Project. Oxford, Oxbow 
Books. 
T rireme T rust Newsletter No.13.
  


    
    
    
    
    
    
T able 3.2. Speed 71/2 knots.
===== PAGE 63 =====
4.  The Slow T rireme Experience in Olympias in 1994
1. Introduction
A  variety  of  reasons  have  been  identified   for  ancient 
commentators to record ships or a whole fleet as slow or 
fast. A summary of the 1994 sea trials alludes to many of 
those factors associated with the slow trireme classification. 
The  increasing   age  of  Olympias   has  brought   a  more 
pronounced  hog  and  generally  loosening  structure.  An 
under-strength crew reduced the motive power available to 
drive the ship. A crew of relatively inexperienced rowers, 
with few veterans from previous trials, compounded the 
numerical shortfall. An entirely new generation of officers 
running the oarcrew and experimental trials programme 
made the trials a fresh start.
  However, in terms of experimental archaeology these 
factors provide performance details in a rather different 
range from those reported previously. The different style 
and  priorities  of  a  new  rowing  master  also  provided  a 
different perspective as well as a new voice in the stern.
2. Comparison of 2-level and 3-level rowing
The reduced number of crew available for the 1994 trials 
made it relatively easy to compare directly the effects of 
rowing on two and three levels with essentially the same 
people  rowing.  During  the  first  ten  days  of  the  trials, 
the crew had an approximately equal number of sessions 
rowing  on  first  three,  then  two  levels. T wo  days  at  the 
end  of  the  two  weeks  were  dedicated  to  achieving  the 
1994 crew’s best performance: 28 July was rowed on two 
levels and 29 July on three with the crew centrally located 
between seats 6 and 28.
  On  both   these   days   Olympias   was  rowed   at  full 
achievable  speed  through  the  Poros  Channel  with  the 
time to row from the central square war memorial to the 
chapel at the eastern end being recorded; in each case the 
timed course was a maximum effort piece in the middle 
of 20 minutes of continuous rowing. Average speed and 
distance run has been estimated from the GPS receiver 
readings recorded during the timed section. The chart of 
Andrew T aylor
Poros Harbour and Approaches gives a minimum distance 
for the fixed distance as 0.52 nautical miles although the 
actual  course  steered  may  have  been  as  much  as  0.58 
nautical   miles.  Seating  plans,  recording  who  actually 
rowed, and where, were completed for the two ‘race days.’ 
In  conjunction  with  the  6-minute  fixed-seat  ergometer 
test results, it is possible to make a detailed comparison 
of the crew’s power output for the two days. These data 
are summarised in Table 4.1. The average power output 
in the ergometer tests was 160 Watts; individuals ranged 
from 328 to 83 W, with 18% of them above 200 W and 
only one individual above 240 W. The 1994 trials crew 
were relatively weak and unfit.
  Essentially  the  same  people  rowed  on  each  day,  the 
slight reduction in number on the second day being due 
to  early  departures  at  the  end  of  the  trials.  The  same 
set  of  oars  was  used  in  each  case  with  the  necessary 
repositioning  happening  after  rowing  on  28  July.  Both 
pieces were completed during the morning outings after 
20–25 minutes of warm-up rowing. The light wind was of 
similar strength and direction on both days, however the 
channel course was chosen to maximise shelter; the pieces 
were rowed in essentially still conditions. The time of day 
was similar with any tide or current through the channel 
assumed to be the same. Precise courses were not recorded 
and  variation  in  the  track  may  have  sampled  different 
currents as well as varying the total distance covered. For 
a variety of reasons, return trips through the channel did 
not provide reliable rowing data. The grouping of the crew 
into the more severely hogged central section of the ship 
may have adversely affected performance on the second 
day.
  T owing tests undertaken in 1988 provide measurements 
of the total power necessary to overcome resistance at a 
given speed (Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 21, 72; Shaw 
1993a).  The  values  appropriate  to  the  measured  speeds 
have  been  included  in Table  4.1.  The  efficiency  of  the 
oarsystem and technical ability of the crew to deliver the 
necessary propulsive power can be estimated by comparing 
===== PAGE 64 =====
4. The Slow Trireme Experience in Olympias in 1994 51
these figures with those measured on the ergometers. The 
efficiencies range from 19 to 25 % with 2 levels and 16 to 
29% with 3 levels rowing; the uncertainty results from the 
variation in speed estimates. If the crew had spread their 
efforts  more  evenly  over  the  20  minutes  of  continuous 
rowing, then we might have expected a 20 % reduction 
in average power output, as compared with the 6-minute 
ergometer tests. This would bring the mean efficiency to 
28%,  more  in  line  with  that  found  in  the  sprints  (see 
Section 3 below).
  There  was  no  perceptible  difference  in  the  ability  of 
the oarcrew to propel the ship whether organised on two 
or three levels. This result confirms that the reasons for 
the previously reported lack of effective contribution by 
the thalamian rowers in Olympias have been found (Shaw 
1993b, 62). Due to the reduced crew numbers in 1994, all 
the thalamians rowed with wide-bladed oars allowing them 
to reach the same efficiency as rowers on other levels. The 
earlier result does not prove that ancient triremes did not 
have oars at three levels (cf. Tilley 1995). As with the 1990 
trials, the average power output of the thalamian rowers, 
as measured in the ergometer tests, was not significantly 
different from that of the other two levels (Shaw 1993b). 
The low average power output of the crew meant that it 
was not possible to test this conclusion at speeds above 5 
knots.
3. T op speed in 1994
On  28  July,  three   maximal   effort   sprint   runs   were 
undertaken.  Olympias  was  accelerated  steadily  to  attain 
maximum speed, which was then sustained for 45 seconds. 
Table 4.2 summarises the results. 
  Run A was conducted in a 10 to 15 knot tail wind. 
Based on drifting tests John Coates has provided formulae 
by  which  to  calculate  the  net  resistance/assistance   for 
any true wind (Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 32). The 
wind  assistance  on  the  first  run  will  be  equivalent  to  a 
power  contribution  of  somewhere  from  1.3  to  4.4  kW 
across the range of estimated wind speeds, which brings 
the  effective  power  delivered  by  crew  down  to  a  value 
nearer that produced in the last two runs. Runs B and C 
were completed in opposite directions in calm water well 
sheltered from any wind. In total, an hour of rowing had 
been  conducted  prior  to  the  last  two  sprint  runs  being 
undertaken, although each was preceded by a short rest. 
  Each  of  the  sprint  runs  required  approximately  two 
minutes of maximal effort from the crew. Typical athletes 
will be able to maintain an average power output over two 
minutes  which  is  approximately  twenty  percent  higher 
than that maintained over 6 minutes. That is, if the crew 
had  undertaken   2-minute   ergometer   tests,  we  would 
have expected power outputs twenty percent higher than 
those recorded in the 6 minute tests. On 28 July, 1994 
the crew would have delivered a total power equivalent 
to 22.8 kW. The maximum speeds obtained by the 1994 
trials crew required an effective power of 10 kW giving 
overall efficiency for the crew and oarsystem of 43% in 
short bursts. This is broadly similar to the 39% transfer 
coefficient of power from shore to ship quoted by Shaw 
for  the  1990  trials  crew  performance  in  similar  sprints 
(Shaw  1993b).  Shaw  also  found  that  the  relative  drop 
in mechanical power with increasing duration was more 
pronounced   in  earlier   trials  crews  as  compared   with 
standard reference figures. This would tend to reduce the 
efficiency figure quoted here for the 1994 crew, perhaps 
also  explaining  some  of  the  difference  from  the  longer 
duration pieces discussed above.
4. Sensitivity at the oar handle
In common with oared vessels in general, Olympias can 
accommodate a roll of up to 3 degrees thereby allowing 
rowers to continue working their oars in both waves and 
crosswind. When the ship is inclined at 3 degrees from the 
upright, the rowers on the ‘down’ side cannot clear waves 
larger than about 0.2 m from trough to crest, compared 
with about 0.8 m when the ship is upright. A number of 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
T able 4.1. Details of the timed rows through the Poros channel comparing Olympias being rowed on the two upper levels with 
essentially the same crew rowing on all three levels a day later. A few people sat in thalamian seats on the first day whilst several 
left before the second day’s trials. There is no perceptible difference between the two modes. 
===== PAGE 65 =====
Andrew T aylor52
factors affect the angle of the oars relative to the rower’s 
position  in  the  ship,  effectively  the  angle  the  oar  loom 
makes with the mean water level. Change in roll and pitch 
as people move around the vessel, turning manoeuvres, 
changes in displacement and hogging, as well as crosswinds, 
will all affect the relative height at which the oar handle 
is  worked.  Increasing  wave  amplitude  requires  a  larger 
margin for clearance.
4.1 Displacement for a reduced crew
In 1994 Olympias was manned by a crew of 130 (typically 
with  120  rowing),   70  people  less  than  the  designed 
complement.   All  the  oarcrew,  including   non-rowing 
section  leaders  etc.,  were  weighed:  124  people  with  a 
total mass of 8.87 tonnes. To this should be added: the 
Hellenic Navy personnel also aboard during the trials, six 
or seven individuals at 0.5 tonnes, and an allowance for 
drinking water and other personal items, 3 kg per person, 
thus  giving  a  total  crew  walk-on  weight  of  9.8  tonnes. 
The ship’s displacement without crew but with oars and 
fitted for sailing was measured at 26.12 tonnes in 1990 
(Shaw 1993b). Reducing the number of oars aboard by 
50, at 9 kg each, and adding the crew mass gives a total 
displacement  for  36.4  tonnes.  Subtracting  the  50  oars 
left ashore and the missing 70 crew (75 kg average with 
3 kg of kit) from the 1990 overall displacement of 42.25 
tonnes, we get a similar figure of 36.3 tonnes.
 Olympias’ hydrostatic curves indicate a sinkage of 11 
mm per tonne for displacements from 30 to 50 tonnes 
(Shaw 1993b). During the 1994 trials the ship was 5.9 
tonnes lighter than designed and consequently rode 65 mm 
higher in the water. If oar blades are assumed to remain 
fully immersed, this increase in the height of the wales 
above the water will increase the angle the loom makes to 
the horizontal by 2.0 degrees for the thranites. Most of the 
3-degree design tolerance was therefore missing in 1994, 
making it extremely difficult to keep the blades immersed 
in the troughs of even small waves, on the windward side 
in a crosswind or on the inside of even a gentle turn.
  The end of the oar handle will be 3 cm higher compared 
with  the  surrounding   structure  of  the  ship  when  the 
crew is reduced to the numbers employed in 1994. Most 
critically, in  Olympias as currently fitted out, the zygian 
looms just short of the handle section will rise by 16 mm, 
leading to their frequently hitting the structure supporting 
the thranite seats during the power phase of each stroke. 
The experience of the 1994 trials indicated that we were 
operating  at  the  lower  limit  of  displacement  for  which 
Olympias could be rowed in the calm water available at 
Poros.  The  ship  would  need  ballasting  to  be  effectively 
rowed in wave amplitudes over 0.2 m or with fewer crew 
in calm conditions.
4.2 Crew movement
The sensitivity of skilled rowers to the position of the oar 
handle as the blade enters the water means they can detect 
the change in heel associated with a single person moving 
across the canopy from one side of Olympias to the other. 
Assuming that the person was 75 kg, moved 4.0 m, and 
that the ship displaced 42 tonnes (full crew) and had a 
metacentric height of 1.13 m, then these rowers detect and 
need to compensate for a total roll of just 0.4 degrees. Blind 
tests with the 1994 oarcrew indicated that rowers, with a 
wide range of experience, could reliably identify whenever 
two people moved across the ship at any point along its 
length, a change in heel of 0.7 degrees (metacentric height 
1.3 m, displacement 37 tonnes). Unexpected changes in 
the height of the oar handle as it is placed in the water 
degrades the performance of the oarcrew. During critical 
battle manoeuvres a minimum of non-rowing movement 
would be essential, and it is little wonder that marines were 
trained to throw javelins from a seated position.
  During  the  1992  cruise  around  the  Saronic  Gulf, 
40-minute periods of rowing were interspersed with 20 
minutes  of  rest,  the  ship  being  rowed  from  the  upper 
two levels only. Following the changeover people would 
move rapidly to the bow to relieve themselves in buckets 
stationed on the foredeck. The change in trim that resulted 
when around ten people joined the toilet queue rendered 
it nearly impossible for those in the bow section to extract 
their oars from the water at the end of the stroke. The 
slight wave chop of around 0.3 m certainly exacerbated 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
T able 4.2. Details of sprint runs undertaken on 28 July, 1994. Following a steady acceleration, the crew was asked to maintain 
their best possible speed for a further 45 seconds. The means of the speeds from the GPS receiver, recorded over the last 45 seconds, 
are tabulated. The power necessary to overcome water resistance at the speeds noted on the line above have been calculated from 
Annex F .3 in Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990.
===== PAGE 66 =====
4. The Slow Trireme Experience in Olympias in 1994 53
the problem. The net effect of moving 800 kg forward by 
15 m reduces the trim at the forward tip of the ram by 
immersing it a further 8 cm. At seat 6, 9.2 m from the 
bow, this corresponds to a reduction in trim of 4 cm, with 
the height of the oarhandle dropping by 18 mm compared 
to the rower and ship structure. Rowers in the stern would 
have needed a similar increase in height to keep the blade 
in the water, but they were not sufficiently aggrieved to 
complain of the effect. Moving even a few troops forward 
immediately  prior  to  contact  would  significantly  affect 
oar  performance  in  the  critical  moments  leading  up  to 
ramming.
  Ancient  accounts  seldom  describe  triremes  carrying 
more  than  30  to  40  troops  in  addition  to  the  normal 
complement. If we allow an average body weight of 75 kg 
with  an  extra  25  kg  of  equipment  per  person,  then  30 
additional troops will add an extra 3 tonnes to the ship’s 
displacement.  Here  we  estimate  the  effect  on  the  oar 
handle as experienced by the rowers. The extra deck troops 
will  cause  a  sinkage  of  33  mm  and  decrease  the  height 
of the oarhandle by 15 mm. Clearly this was considered 
acceptable by ancient commanders and is less than that 
experienced as becoming unacceptable in Olympias, but 
emphasises the narrow range of tolerances under which 
an oared warship could operate. Carrying 60 extra troops 
would  double  the  loss  in  vertical  clearance  and  require 
strong  remedial  action  even  to  make  rowing  possible. 
Commanders would need to ensure safety in waves of up 
to perhaps one metre, which would increase the required 
clearance over that discussed here.
  Rowers in Olympias have frequently customised their 
height relative to the oar handle by changing the size of 
the cushion used. Typically this allows people of widely 
different heights to row more effectively in the positions 
constructed for an average individual. Within the context 
of  carrying  additional  troops,  it  would  be  possible  to 
remove  the  cushions  entirely,  making  rowing  possible, 
but  with  an  attendant  loss  of  efficiency,  to  say  nothing 
of  comfort.  Coates  proposed  the  use  of  variable-height 
cushions to provide optimal performance in both rough 
and smooth water (Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 81).
4.3 Hogging
The hog of Olympias has continued to increase with age. 
The height above the water of both the thranite outrigger 
and  main  upper  wale  were  measured  without  the  crew 
aboard (Fig. 4.1). The similarity of the hog of the main 
upper wale to that measured in more detail on the outrigger 
leads to the conclusion that the basic structure of the ship 
was causing the hogging. A moderate crosswind blowing 
from starboard caused the slight heel to port. 
  The mid-section wales were from 50 to 80 mm higher 
than  the  mean  for  each  side,  graphically  indicating  the 
extent of hogging. This effect is equivalent to the 6-tonne 
reduction in crew displacement discussed above, with all 
the  negative  impact  that  that  implies.  Members  of  the 
oarcrew who rowed in a variety of positions in Olympias 
commented on the significant difficulties in the centre of 
the ship as compared to the ends. Toward the ends of the 
oar wales, heights above the water drop to between 60 and 
100 mm below the mean values, which would compound 
problems associated with carrying crew above the designed 
complement,  e.g. thirty  additional  fighting  men.  As  an 
oared  ship’s  hog  becomes  more  pronounced,  the  range 
of  displacements  for  which  the  oars  can  successfully  be 
worked is further reduced.
4.4 Wind-induced heel
As an illustration of the effects of wind induced heel upon 
the ability of the crew to work the oars, we can investigate 
the hogging profile (Fig. 4.1) which was measured in the 
presence of a 15 to 25 knot crosswind. At her mooring 
Olympias was moderately sheltered from this, and so was 
probably  experiencing  a  lighter  wind.  In  addition,  the 
mooring lines probably resisted a reasonable fraction of 
the lateral moment.
  The mean thranite oar wales were 1.466 m (port) and 
1.543 m (starboard) above the water, an average with the 
ship upright of 1.50 m. The displacement marks, located 
near seat 7, indicated that the water was 0.86 m (port) 
and 0.78 m (starboard) above the keel, confirming this 
8 cm heel. With a waterline breadth of 3.6 m, this gives 
a heel angle of 1.3 degrees and an average change in oar 
angle of 0.9 degrees. In fact, with the hogging as measured 
in Olympias, the oar angles might range from optimal to 
4.7 degrees, which for those seats is very near the extreme 
limits within which a person could row.
  If most of the non-rowing crew were repositioned on the 
windward side of the ship then a moderate wind generated 
heel could be overcome. Moving 24 crew from a average 
position  on  the  centre-line  to  the  deck  edge,  i.e.  2  m, 
would overcome a total heel of 2.2 degrees, which would 
be sufficient to bring Olympias back to a level trim in the 
crosswind measured. It would be less easy to compensate 
for crosswinds of greater strength whilst still maintaining 
a heel angle in which rowing was effective. Use of the sail 
would tend to impose heel angles large enough to make 
rowing impossible (see pp. 142–3).
4.5 Manoeuvre-induced heel
T urning  a  ship  inevitably  causes  it  to  roll  toward  the 
outside  of  the  turn.  Tight  turns  entered  at  high  speed 
cause Olympias to heel considerably. Indeed, during turn 
diameters of less than about 100 m it is difficult to get the 
oarblades into the water on the side towards the centre of 
the turn, even in calm water. Getting the rowers on the 
inside edge to lean toward the centre of the turn provides 
some small gains in maintaining trim and therefore helps 
retain the effectiveness of those who continue rowing on 
the outside of the curve. 
  Even  in  larger-diameter  turns,  the  change  in  heel  of 
===== PAGE 67 =====
Andrew T aylor54
Olympias,  with  its  attendant  change  in  handle  heights, 
affects an individual’s efficiency in placing and extracting the 
oarblade and therefore his effective oar power. Frequently, 
the disruption of timing within the oarcrew following the 
onset of this heel is sufficient to last for the duration of 
the turn, and this is a significant factor in the loss of boat 
speed during a turn. A rapid application of helm causes 
the heel to develop fully between one stroke and the next, 
thereby maximising the timing problems. We were not able 
to experiment with less aggressive strategies in 1994. The 
fact that the heel settled back towards a smaller heel during 
the turn suggests that such efforts would pay dividends.
  An instrument with sufficient accuracy to measure roll 
to  fractions  of  a  degree  was  not  employed  in  Olympias 
during either the 1992 or 1994 trials, leaving us without 
detailed  quantitative   data.  As  an  order  of  magnitude 
calculation, if 10 deck crew, 750 kg, were moved 2 m from 
an average position in the middle of the ship towards the 
beam at the centre of the turn, they could counterbalance 
1.8 degrees of heel; sufficient to overcome heeling problems 
on the larger diameter turns.
  As an illustration of the variation in speed during turns 
and under a variety of wind conditions, Fig. 4.2 shows 
three 20-minute sections of rowing during a long session on 
23 July, 1994. Annotations on the graphs were logged by 
the recorder at the time. Typically, the 120-strong oarcrew 
could maintain 4.5 knots unless disrupted by manoeuvre, 
wind or boat wash. The lighter than designed displacement 
made Olympias especially sensitive to any change in oar 
handle heights, and it is our opinion that the resulting loss 
of timing was the major factor influencing speed loss in 
all cases except the presence of a head wind. A reduction 
in speed from 4.5 knots to 2.5 knots represents an 80% 
loss in effective oar power.
  The 1994 trials crew broke no records for particularly 
rapid  or  tight  turns.  With  entry  speeds  of  around  4 
knots, the crew could achieve a yaw rate of 3 degrees per 
second. 
5. Rowing backwards
Olympias  was  rowed  in  reverse  for  over  fifteen  minutes 
on 26 July, 1994, with 4.5 knots being typical of those 
portions with good timing. A following wind, gusting to 
15 knots, boosted this speed to 5.6 knots. Near the end 
of the run, a gentle 180 degree turn, whilst going astern, 
was completed in 165 seconds with a final speed of 1.9 
knots into the wind. During this piece Olympias was pulled 
backwards, i.e. the rowers faced the bows and used the oar 
of the person in the seat behind. After initial practice, the 
command to execute a change to or from this mode of 
rowing was made using a whistle. It typically took from 
8 to 12 seconds between the command being given and 
rowing in the opposite direction being able to commence. 
The  shortest  times  occurred  when  the  crew  were  given 
some warning just preceding the change.
  The internal fittings in Olympias are not well adapted 
for pulling the ship backwards. In particular, for most seats 
there were no strong anchor points on which to brace one’s 
feet, an essential minimum for powerful rowing. During 
the  trials  relatively  little  reverse  rowing  was  practised 
prior to the piece reported here, with a consequent lack 
of experience in taking visual timing signals from those 
in the bows. The mainmast tabernacle and supports for 
the foredeck also obstructed the sight-lines into the bow. 
The  combination  of  these  factors  led  to  more  frequent 
disintegration of timing than was common when rowing 
forward at this stage of the trials.
  Contrary to previously published reports (Shaw 1993c) 
there  were  no  problems  in  controlling  the  helm  whilst 
moving backwards (including at speeds over 5 knots) or 
during the 180 degree turn going astern. The helmsman 
Figure 4.1. Measurement of the hogging profile of Olympias in July 1994. A cross-wind caused the ship to heel to port, a total 
of 8 cm, as measured by the displacement marks. The outrigger thranite oar wales were measured in detail. Measurements of 
the upper wale indicate that the overall ship structure was hogged in the same way.
===== PAGE 68 =====
4. The Slow Trireme Experience in Olympias in 1994 55
described  the  rudders  as  feeling  ‘heavy’  but  requiring 
relatively little effort to maintain control. There was no 
sign of the rudder taking control. Shaw reported that the 
1990  trials  crew,  with  two  levels  rowing  could  pull  the 
ship in reverse at 4 knots.
6. Boarding and mooring
The following operations were conducted with no particular 
efforts made to minimise the time taken. Times therefore 
represent a generous upper limit to that which might have 
been possible in antiquity: 
i)   Using one gangway to board the crew of 130 over the 
stern  from  the  wharf  typically  took  six  minutes  with 
people ready to row off in another six to seven minutes. 
It has previously been reported that a full crew of 200 
could be embarked and reach operational readiness in 
1  minute  30  seconds,  giving  some  indication  of  how 
much some of the times reported here might be reduced 
(Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 37). 
ii)   Anchoring,  backing  into  a  beach,  attaching  mooring 
lines to shore and finishing with oars took less than four 
minutes. Coming off this Mediterranean moor took three 
minutes, with the operation starting once the last of the 
oarcrew  were  aboard.  On  another  occasion  it  proved 
Figure 4.2. Boat speed recorded by GPS receiver during three of the 20-minute sections rowed during a four-hour outing on 23 
July, 1994. A one-to-two-minute drink break was provided every 20 minutes. Descriptive notes logged by the recorder during 
each piece have been added to the graphs. The reduction in speed resulting from the disruptive impact of turns, cross winds, 
poor timing and boat wash is clearly evident.
===== PAGE 69 =====
Andrew T aylor56
possible to slip the stern lines and begin weighing anchor 
while the final crew members were scrambling aboard. 
iii)   Around 100 people were recovered from the water in ten 
minutes. The vast majority climbed onto the ram and 
then inboard over the bow. It would have been possible to 
speed this process by stationing assistants at intermediate 
points along this route. No efforts were made to simulate 
the extraction from the water of exhausted or injured 
individuals.
7. Drifting and control of ship orientation
Olympias is blown noticeably to leeward in even fairly light 
winds. Once the drift speed reaches around 1.5 knots it is 
possible to point the ship in any desired direction using 
just the rudders for control. Table 4.3 provides a summary 
of the final drift speeds reached with the wind at a variety 
of relative bearings. The Hellenic Navy helmsman usually 
chose to place the ship broadside to the wind since that 
minimised  drift  caused  by  the  wind.  The  resistance  to 
lateral motion through the water is significantly more than 
the extra drive due to the increased cross section presented 
to the wind, a finding similar to that previously published 
(Coates,  Platis  and  Shaw  1990,  32).  From  stationary 
with the bow into a wind gusting to 20 knots, it took 2 
minutes, 25 seconds to gain sufficient speed and then turn 
90 degrees to drifting beam on. A similar manoeuvre in a 
wind gusting to 15 knots took 2 minutes 39 seconds. 
8. Controlling the oarcrew without electronic 
speakers
Moderate  efforts  were  made  during  the  1994  trials  to 
execute  and  control  a  variety  of  manoeuvres  without 
recourse to the electronic amplifier and speakers installed 
in Olympias. As the trials progressed it was possible to run 
the oar crew in this way with around three people: 
i)   The rowing master, keleustes, near the stern and clearly 
visible to around two thirds of the oarcrew. The need to 
immediately acknowledge requests from the helmsman, 
or captain, and translate these into instructions to the 
rowers makes the close proximity essential. A vocal relay 
can also be provided for those rowers in the immediate 
area of the stern who cannot easily see the rowing master’s 
gestures whilst rowing. Since this group also includes the 
individuals  marked  as  providing  the  common  timing 
points for the crew the close proximity makes it easy to 
provide fine control of the strike rate and hence ship’s 
speed. 
ii)   A  person  forward   of  the  mainmast   tabernacle   (the 
supporting structure into which the mast is stepped) is 
essential  to  relay  instructions  and  hand  signals  to  the 
more  distant  and  less  visible  members  of  the  crew  in 
the bow section. This would be an obvious role for an 
assistant  rowing  master  who  may  well  have  been  the 
pentekontarchos. 
iii)   A  mobile  assistant  aft  of  the  mainmast  to  deal  with 
requests from rowers, emergencies and also to clarify/re-
establish communication with the person in the bow. 
If  the  deck-crew  aboard  Olympias  were  more  closely 
integrated   with  the  rowers,  as  would  happen  more 
naturally  if,  for  example,  the  crew  all  spoke  the  same 
language,  then  the  mobile  role  of  this  assistant  could 
be taken by them.
A  full-blown   whistle  in  the  stern  was  frequently   not 
heard  by  those  in  the  bow.  On  one  early  occasion,  in 
exasperation, I used a short toot to attract the attention 
of  the  bow  relay-person  (ii).  This  was  assumed  by  the 
crew who could hear it to imply an immediate stop. The 
complete disruption of the oarcrew eventually attracted 
the relevant attention from the bow section. It is essential 
that a person is permanently stationed immediately aft of 
the mainmast, with clear visibility of the rowing master 
or  helmsman,  to  relay  instructions  through  to  those  in 
the bow. With their back to the tabernacle they will not 
obstruct the view of any of the bow rowers. In addition, 
this position is the only place from which a single source 
of sound is audible throughout the oar system, making it 
a natural position for the auletes.
  Without a fully developed code of signal instructions, 
whistles were generally restricted to executing a previously 
communicated instruction and to attracting the rowers’ 
attention (unique sounds were rapidly established to avoid 
confusion). The considerable emphasis on looking toward 
the stern as the means to improve timing had the double 
benefit  of  making  hand  gestures  and  even  mime  fairly 
effective at communicating instructions to the oarcrew. A 
flute player just aft of the mainmast tabernacle would not 
be able to provide audible signals whilst also telegraphing 
mime  and  hand  signals  so  person  (ii)  is  still  required. 
As  a  final  observation  it  would  not  be  possible  for  the 
bow  officer,  or  prorates,  to  undertake  role  (iii)  with  the 
oarcrew since they would be required to oversee a myriad 
of other ship operations at just those times when effective 
communication with the oarcrew was vital, e.g. judging 
distance  to  a  ramming  target,  anchoring  and  weighing, 
marshalling or repelling boarding crews, to name several 
possible duties. 
9. Effective technique and crew skill
Like all effective rowing styles, in whatever context, good 



 



 
T able 4.3. GPS-based estimates of drift with the ship held at 
a variety of bearings to a 20 knot wind. The rudder provided 
total control of ship pointing at drift speeds above about 1.5 
knots. Boat speeds are probably accurate to a few tenths of 
a knot, whilst that of the wind is plus or minus about 5 
knots.
===== PAGE 70 =====
4. The Slow Trireme Experience in Olympias in 1994 57
technique in Olympias involves placing the blade into the 
water at maximum reach, drawing it through at a constant 
depth then extracting it. The fixed seat places relatively 
more emphasis on a large body motion although, perhaps 
surprisingly to rowers of modern sliding seat racing shells, 
it is still possible to deliver substantial power with the legs. 
Fixed seat does not mean fixed bum, since the hips rotate 
forward and back with the body causing the leg to bend 
at the knee joint by up to 45 degrees during the stroke. 
The feel is like the ‘half slide’ exercise in a racing shell. 
This is especially true in the less constricted environment 
of  an  ergometer  test  with  the  seat  firmly  tied  in  place, 
as  compared  with  conditions  in Olympias .  As  a  rowing 
experience, the trireme is definitely constricted although 
bigger  and/or  more  skilful  people  tend  to  create  more 
personal space in which to row. With the restrictions of the 
slightly short interscalmium, every person needs to ensure 
maximum body lean forward to allow those behind to row 
at full length. It is possible to deliver a gentle nudge in 
the back of the person in front to provide any necessary 
reminders!
  Rowing Olympias is most critically a question of timing. 
To  achieve  this  every  rower  should  keep  their  head  up 
and concentrate on a person as far as possible down the 
boat. This usually means that they focus on a person on 
the  opposite  side  which  requires  clear  sight  lines  down 
and across in the volume of ship occupied by the rowers’ 
heads; in Olympias this involves a minimum of people on 
the central gangway. To encourage this use of a common 
timing point, the most visible zygian rowers near the stern 
were given day-glow armbands on their inboard elbows 
to clearly attract the eye. Similar armbands on those near 
the bow would have been a great aid when pulling the 
ship in reverse.
  The  thalamians  with  their  view  cut  off  by  the  cross 
beam  currently  have  the  most  restricted  sightlines.   If 
their seats were made lower relative to the cross beams by 
about 150 mm, as has been proposed elsewhere (below, 
pp. 83, 87), then they could join the rest of the crew in 
having a view of the sternmost rowers. The addition of 
racks, in which to store lifejackets immediately below the 
canopy makes it difficult but not impossible to maintain 
sight-lines  whilst  rowing  in  the  thranite  seats.  Several 
seats forward of the mainmast have their view restricted 
by the tabernacle in which the mast is stepped. The crew 
was  divided  into  sections  for  coaching  and  instruction 
purposes. The restrictions in sight, as well as the ability 
to speak and move around this tabernacle mean that one 
boundary between these crew groupings has to occur at 
the mainmast.
  The shortfall in volunteers for the 1994 trials crew meant 
that anybody willing to travel to Greece was accepted. Few 
applicants provided ergometer test scores prior to arrival 
and most of these were not completed with the seat tied 
in place, thereby allowing use of the legs with a fixed seat. 
Although all the oarcrew undertook a 6-minute ergometer 
test under standard conditions early in the trial period, 
this could not have been used to ascertain potential rowing 
ability prior to arrival. Almost everybody did indicate the 
number of years of previous rowing experience on their 
application  forms.  In  terms  of  previous  experience,  the 
crew neatly divided into thirds: ‘nil,’ ‘some’ or ‘none;’ one 
or two years; and three years or more. As a basis for skill 
assessment,  these  returns  have  been  compared  with  the 
standardised grading of individual ability made by section 
leaders towards the end of the trials, Table 4.4.
  With  less  than  around  three  years  previous  rowing 
experience, in whatever tradition, the actual oarsmanship 
exhibited   by  an  individual   in  Olympias   will  tend  to 
cover the full range of ability and the level cannot really 
be  predicted  ahead  of  time.  Participation  in  the  sport 
for  longer  than  this  pretty  much  guarantees  skilful  and 
effective rowers. Seventy percent of the most experienced 
rowers had been rowing for more than five years which 
would probably be a preferable benchmark of experience 
from which to reliably guarantee a high fraction of skilled 
rowers.  Although  hardly  surprising,   these  conclusions 
graphically illustrate the years of experience necessary to 
produce  skilled  high-performance  crews,  a  fact  readily 
acknowledged in antiquity. 
Bibliography
Coates, J. F ., Platis S. K., and Shaw, J. T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988: Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea Trials of 
Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Shaw, J. T . (1993) The Trireme Project: Operational Experience 
1987–90. Lessons Learnt. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Shaw, J. T . (1993a) The resistance/speed curve of Olympias. 
In Shaw 1993, 45–7.
Shaw, J. T . (1993b) Rowing Olympias: Further lessons of the 
sea trials. In Shaw 1993, 58–68.
Shaw, J. T . (1993c) Rowing Astern. In Shaw 1993, 69–70
Tilley, A. F . (1995) The performance of the Olympias under 
oar. The Mariner’s Mirror 81, 207.



     
      
      
      
      
T able 4.4. Comparison of the years of rowing experience with 
rowing skill as assessed by section leaders during the 1994 
sea trials. Grade A, committed high quality rower; B+, good 
enthusiastic rower; B- good rower with begrudging attitude; 
C, technically weak but enthusiastic trier; D, disruptive and 
negative attitude with minimal ability. Five of the six people 
with three plus years experience who had rowed on the trireme 
before and might therefore have been accurately graded based 
on previous experience were given C or D grades.
===== PAGE 71 =====
5. Olympias at the Olympics, 2004
After the final series of sea trials in 1994, Olympias was 
cleaned and refurbished, but was unfortunately left in the 
water for a short period before her hull had been properly 
protected. As a result, her underwater planking was severely 
damaged by an attack of shipworm (teredo navalis) and in 
1995 had to undergo extensive replacement (see Lipke, pp. 
203–6 with Fig. 27.1). This was a clear reminder of why 
such vessels were kept out of the water during antiquity 
when not in active service. Once repaired, she was put 
on permanent display at the Hellenic Navy Museum 
at Neo Faliro, alongside historical vessels including the 
battlecruiser G. Averoff . There, she has been visited by 
tourists and countless Greek schoolchildren learning about 
their naval heritage.
 Initially, however, she was kept out in the open, and 
gradually began to deteriorate in ways which had not been 
anticipated, but which help to explain the purpose of the 
ancient sheds built to house such ships. The upper timbers 
of the ship, especially those of the canopy, soon dried out 
and became brittle, but a more serious problem was caused 
by exposure to the rains over winter. It would appear that 
Boris Rankov
moisture gradually seeped into the spaces between the 
tenons and the mortises within the hull, and that this 
encouraged the growth of fungal spores which had blown 
from nearby trees. The effects took some time to develop, 
but by 2002 parts of the hull had been completely eaten 
away by fungal rot, so that in places it was possible to see 
the tenons and right through the shell (Fig. 5.1). It was 
clear that unless action were taken rapidly, the ship would 
within a few years cease to exist. 
 A possibility of salvation was offered by Professor Claus 
von Carnap-Bornheim, the Director of the Archäologisches 
Landesmuseum at Schloss Gottorf in Schleswig, Germany, 
who had offered to lend one of his museums’ prize exhibits, 
the oldest surviving Saxon ship found at Nydam, Schleswig 
to the Danish National Museum in Copenhagen. His 
idea was to take Olympias to Germany, where she would 
be completely refurbished, and to put her on display and 
perhaps even conduct sea trials with her at Schloss Gottorf 
during the months while the Nydam ship was in Denmark. 
In the meantime, however, the need to repair the ship and 
a proposal that Olympias should carry the Olympic flame 
for the 2004 Olympics in Athens prompted the Elefsina 
Shipyards to offer her refurbishment free of charge.
 The work was undertaken in 2003 (Fig. 5.2). It was 
decided that it would be too difficult and expensive to 
replace the underwater planking with mortise-and-tenon 
joints, so additional ribs and stringers were inserted 
internally (Fig. 5.3) to which new strakes could be attached 
throughout and made watertight with modern caulking. 
This was extremely successful cosmetically, and from the 
outside the ship now looked as she had when new. However, 
the separation of the upper planking, which retained its 
original mortise-and-tenon monocoque structure, from the 
lower planking, which was merely bolted to the new ribs, 
meant that the hull was now much weaker structurally 
and could not be kept at sea for long periods without 
further weakening. This nevertheless allowed the ship to 
perform as a splendid vehicle for the Olympic flame as 
the Games approached. She was a particularly appropriate 
Figure 5.1. The planking of Olympias affected by fungal rot, 
June, 2002 (Photo: Boris Rankov/Trireme Trust).
===== PAGE 72 =====
5. Olympias at the Olympics, 2004 59
long-distance rowing in a trireme. During this particular 
outing, the ship was rowed into and round Pasalimáni/
Zea harbour, today a yachting harbour but in the fourth 
century BC entirely ringed by 196 trireme shipsheds; 
the latter included those excavated by Iacob Dragatsis 
and Wilhelm Dörpfeld in 1885 which provided some 
of the basic dimensions for the Olympias reconstruction. 
It was notable that there was considerable room within 
the harbour, even today, for the ship to circle and 
manoeuvre.
Figure 5.2. Olympias during refurbishment at Elefsina Shipyards, July, 2003 (Photo: Boris Reankov/Trireme Trust).
Figure 5.3. Internal view of Olympias after refurbishment, 
July 2003, showing new ribs and stringers attached with bolts 
(Photo: Boris Rankov/Trireme Trust).
choice for this as she was not named after the mother of 
Alexander the Great, as many have believed, but after an 
actual Athenian trireme of the fourth century BC whose 
name meant ‘Ship of the Olympic Games’ (see IG 2/32 
2 1604.8, dated 378/7 BC), because when the ship was 
launched in 1987 Greece was already planning her bid for 
the 1996 Games.
 A volunteer oarcrew was recruited in Greece to train 
in the ship in the month leading up to the opening of 
the Athens Olympics on 13th August, 2004. She was 
operated from the Hellenic Navy Museum (Fig. 5.4), 
and a typical outing involved rowing eastwards along the 
coast past Mikrolimáno (ancient Mounychia harbour) and 
Pasalimáni (Zea) and back, a round trip of about 4 nautical 
miles, perhaps followed by another loop. There were fewer 
than 120 rowers available, and the lowest (thalamian) level 
remained unmanned. The ship’s original oars had not been 
replaced during the refurbishment, and those surviving 
– considerably fewer than the full set of 170 plus 30 spares 
– were now in poor condition and breaking regularly. 
T raining thus concentrated on producing a well-drilled 
crew to transport the flame in ceremony. 
 During an outing on Monday, 19th July, Dr Harry 
Rossiter of the Faculty of Biological Sciences at Leeds 
University and the present writer took the opportunity 
to carry out a small physiological experiment, in which a 
portable laboratory was used to measure the work done 
whilst rowing by a small sample of volunteers; the data 
collected are intended to be of use in building a land-
based test-rig which would replicate rowing on the ship 
and allow experimentation on the physiological aspects of 
===== PAGE 73 =====
Boris Rankov60
 On Wednesday, 11th August, only two days before the 
opening ceremony of the Games, Olympias was rowed 
into Mikrolimáno and then Pasalimáni accompanied by 
the Minos, a reconstruction of a Minoan oared vessel, and 
Kyrenia 2, a reconstruction of a merchant vessel of the 
fourth century BC. The three ships then moved on to the 
Dodecanese dock in the main harbour (Kentrikó Limáni) 
of the Piraeus (ancient Kantharos), and from there, that 
evening, Olympias carried the Olympic flame, by means of 
Figure 5.4. Olympias moored at the Hellenic Navy Museum, July, 2004, with Kyrenia 2 alongside, viewed from the battlecruiser 
G. Averoff (Photo: Boris Rankov/Trireme Trust).
a special torch fixed in the bows, the few hundred metres 
across the harbour to the Aegina dock.
 After the ceremony, Olympias was returned to the 
Hellenic Navy Museum where a roofed shed with 
removable side-panels was built over her dry dock (see Fig. 
IS.1) to prevent any recurrence of fungal rot. Since then, 
she has continued to be on show and carefully maintained 
in pristine condition by the Hellenic Navy; she has not 
been returned to the water. 
===== PAGE 74 =====
Part 2
Proposals for a Revised Design
===== PAGE 75 =====
6.  Preface to the Proposals for a Revised Design
Timothy Shaw
The sea trials of the reconstruction Olympias have shown 
that she is highly manoeuvrable as befits a trireme, that 
she  performs  well  under  sail  and  that  the  principle  of 
having  oars  on  three  levels  is  workable.  However  some 
disappointment has been expressed over what is seen as her 
lack of speed under oar (e.g. in Shaw 1993). Several reasons 
for this lack have been put forward but probably the most 
important one is that nearly all members of the oarcrew 
are prevented from exercising their natural length of stroke 
by their proximity to various parts of the ships’ structure, 
not to mention other members of the oarcrew.
  After  Olympias had  been  constructed  evidence  was 
found  that  her  interscalmium,  that  had  been  set  at  two 
cubits of 444 mm, the ‘Solonic’ cubit, ought probably to 
have been set at two cubits of about 490 mm, giving the 
oarcrew about ten percent more room (Morrison 1991). 
This,  with  some  other  modifications,  was  incorporated 
in  a  revised  design  of  a  trireme  (Coates  1993).  During 
the  trials  in  1994  the  writer  devised  some  experiments 
briefly  described  below  that  led  him  to  conclude  that 
the  modifications  suggested  in  1993  would  still  not  be 
enough to allow the oarcrew to realise their full potential. 
However, he noted that if the proposed longer cubit were 
applied to the inboard length of the oars it would allow 
the seats of the oarcrew to be moved nearer the midline of 
the ship, and that if the footrests remained near the shell 
of the hull, a canted oar-rig would result. He presented 
a  diagram  illustrating  this  (Shaw  1994).  He  considered 
that in a new ship such a rig could be so proportioned as 
to enable all members of the oarcrew to reach past and 
outboard of each other as they prepared for the catch. In 
this way a long stroke could be obtained, limited only by 
the physique of the oarcrew and not calling for any further 
increase of the interscalmium. Unfortunately such a scheme 
cannot be applied in Olympias, but Coates has designed a 
Mark II trireme that makes use of this idea (see Chapter 
10 below).
  While the idea of a strongly canted rig is unfamiliar to 
rowers accustomed to racing in eights, it is well known to 
those who race Cornish six-oared gigs at the present day. 
Yet it may be of great antiquity: one of the reliefs brought 
from Nineveh by Sir Henry Layard about the middle of 
the nineteenth century and now in the British Museum 
shows an oared ship of about 700 BC in which the rowers 
are clearly reaching past and outboard of each other for the 
catch as they would if the rig were canted. The ‘Siren’ vase 
also in the British Museum gives a similar impression.
  The  long  stroke  made  possible  by  strongly  canting 
the  oar-rig  of  a  Mark  II  trireme  should  lead  to  a  large 
improvement  in  her  cruising  and  top  speeds  under  oar 
as compared with those of Olympias. Some implications 
of  this  are  examined  in  the  writer’s  three  papers  which 
follow.  The  first  paper  (Chapter  7)  employs  data  from 
British Admiralty charts and Sailing Directions relevant 
to the passage from Byzantium to Heraclea, to reveal what 
sustainable speed of a trireme is entailed by Xenophon’s 
reported statement that the journey could be accomplished 
by such a ship in ‘a long day under oar’ The second paper 
(Chapter  8)  deals  with  the  question  of  whether  such  a 
speed could have been sustained without assistance from 
the wind via the sails. The third paper (Chapter 9) presents 
a  simple  mathematical  model  of  rowing  and  uses  it  to 
compare the predicted performance of T rireme Mark IIa 
(no cant) with that of Mark IIb (canted oar-rig) and of 
course with that of Olympias. 
Bibliography
Coates,  J.  F . (1993)  Development  of  the  design.  In  Shaw 
1993, 71–4.
Morrison, J. S. (1991) Ancient Greek Measures of Length in 
Nautical Contexts. Antiquity 65 (no. 247), 298–305.
Shaw,  J.  T.  (ed.)  (1993) The Trireme Project .  Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.   Oxford,  Oxbow 
Books.
Shaw, J. T . (1994)  The 1994 Trireme Trials 1994. Research 
Results and Discussion. Watlington, The T rireme T rust.
===== PAGE 76 =====
7.  From the Golden Horn to Heraclea:  
duration of the passage in calm weather
1. Summary
One of the pieces of evidence of the speed of an ancient 
Greek  trireme  under  oar  is  a  statement  by  Xenophon 
(Anabasis 6.4.2)  that  for  a  trireme   the  passage   from 
Byzantium to Heraclea entailed “a long day under oar”. 
One version makes it “a very long day”. The implied speed 
sets a standard by which any reconstruction of an ancient 
Greek trireme’s hull and oarsystem must be judged.
  In this paper data from British Admiralty charts and 
British Admiralty Sailing Directions (the Black Sea Pilot) 
are used to assess how long the passage would take in calm 
weather during the ancient sailing season at cruising speeds 
7,  7½  and  8  knots  relative  to  the  water.  It  is  assumed 
that today’s conditions are close to those that obtained in 
antiquity.
  Skilful   helmsmanship   and  local  knowledge   would 
be required in order to avoid adverse currents wherever 
possible and to exploit favourable eddies.
  The main conclusion is that sustained cruising speeds 
in the range 7–8 knots are compatible with the statement 
made by Xenophon and with the calculated performance 
of a moderately good crew (say at 7½ knots relative to the 
water) and of an outstandingly good one (nearly 8 knots). 
The passage would occupy from about 15 to about 17 hours 
not  including  any  mid-day  stoppage.  An  outstandingly 
good crew could accomplish more than 90% of the distance 
in  daylight  at  midsummer,  but  if  a  cooler  season  were 
essential or the crew slower some part of the voyage would 
have  to  be  conducted  in  twilight  and/or  by  moonlight.
2. Discussion
2.1. How long was “a long day”?
Morrison  has  pointed  to  Herodotus’  use  of  the  word 
makremeria (‘long  days’)  and  gives  reason  for  thinking 
that for Herodotus ‘a long day’ meant the period between 
sunrise  and  sunset  in  summertime   (Morrison   1991). 
Morrison   has  quoted   Brown’s  Nautical   Almanack   to 
show that at the beginning of April and the beginning of 
Timothy Shaw
September in the latitude of the southern Black Sea the sun 
is above the horizon for about 12 hours and 40 minutes 
(in modern hours and minutes) and at midsummer for 
15 hours, but that if the hours of twilight before sunrise 
and after sunset are included, making perhaps “a very long 
day”  the  durations  extend  to  14  hours  and  40  minutes 
in early April and early September and to 17½ hours in 
midsummer. Of course twilight shades off into darkness in 
which coastwise navigation would be hazardous. I therefore 
propose that a little more than half the nominal duration 
of twilight be added, making “very long days” vary from 
about 14 hours up to 16½ hours in the absence of help 
from the moon. On cloudless nights when the moon was 
full or nearly so, it would have shone brightly all night. 
That  might  suggest  that  “a  very  long  day”  could  have 
extended to 24 modern hours or even more. But then we 
might expect Xenophon to have written not “a (? very) long 
day” but “a day and a night”. What he did write, coupled 
with the data given above, does not rule out that part of 
the voyage was sometimes conducted by the light of the 
moon but does appear to me to rule out a 24 hour “long 
day”. In what follows I seek to show that a moderately 
good crew in a suitable ship could accomplish the voyage 
in about 18 hours including an hour’s rest at mid-day, and 
that an exceptionally good one could accomplish it without 
stopping in 15 hours. I think it is reasonable to conclude 
that that these durations are consistent with Xenophon’s 
text  and  with  the  data  from  the  almanack.  The  mean 
speeds while the ship was under way would have been in 
the range 7 to 8 knots relative to the water.
2.2. Ascent of the Bosporus in normal charted 
conditions
The  information  given  here  is  derived  from  Admiralty 
Chart No. 1198 and from the Black Sea Pilot: Admiralty 
Sailing Directions . The course is assumed to start at the 
modern bridge near the mouth of the Golden Horn and 
to end on the eastern side of the northern exit into the 
===== PAGE 77 =====
Timothy Shaw64
Black  Sea.  It  is  described  in  tabular  form.  Distances  in 
nautical  miles  (n.m.)  are  relative  to  the  land.  During 
the  first  5.3  n.m.  the  recommended  course  is  close  to 
the west bank. It then crosses over and stays near to the 
east bank as far as the northern exit. I have assumed that 
during the crossing the ship’s heading is at 45 degrees to 
the adverse stream. The course made good is then at 54.2 
degrees to the stream if the adverse current is 1½ knots, 
or at 57.9 degrees to it if the adverse current is 2 knots. 
Apparently the stream in the narrows at the crossing can 
reach 7 knots but presumably not during the sailing season. 
Exceptionally, the flow may cease. The variations quoted 
below are presumed to be normal, but wider ones must 
occur from time to time.
  At about 6.75 n.m. the adverse current in the centre of 
the narrow channel is charted as 1.5–2 knots, increasing 
to 2–3 knots at about 7.5 n.m. where the strait is wider. 
This may be an effect of the changing depth. As the ship’s 
course  at  these  points  is  near  the  east  bank  I  have  felt 
justified in proposing an adverse current of 1.5–2 knots 
throughout the stretch from 6.2 to 8.6 n.m. where the 
ship enters a helpful eddy (Table 7.1).
  The total duration is in the range 2 hours 20 minutes 
to  2  hours   26  minutes   depending   on  the  currents 
encountered.
  If  the  ship’s  speed  through  the  water  is  7  knots  the 
total duration for the 16.4 n.m. is in the range 2 hours 
31 minutes to 2 hours 38 minutes; if the speed through 
the water is 8 knots the range is from 2 hours 10 minutes 
to 2 hours 16 minutes.
2.3. Conditions of navigation in the southern  
Black Sea
Here  is  a  summary  of  the  statements  in  The  Black Sea 
Pilot referring to the wind, waves, currents, temperatures 
and humidities.
 The prevailing wind   all  the  year  is  from  the  NE  but 
there is a significant proportion of days in which the wind 
blows from the NW to the SW quarter. Near the coast 
the wind direction tends to be modified by the land and 
sea breezes that are well marked in summer. The onshore 
wind develops in mid-morning. By mid-afternoon it may 
reach Force 3 to 4 (i.e. 7 to 16 knots): it fades soon after 
dusk. The land breeze is usually weaker and blows offshore 
from late evening till shortly after sunrise.
 On waves   the  information  is  limited  but  shows  that 
slight seas with waves of 0.5 m or less (implying slight 
winds;   see  my  paper   on  pp.  68–75   below   on  ‘The 
performance   of  ancient  triremes  in  wind  and  waves’) 
are reported in over 50% of observations in spring and 
autumn. Waves exceeding 2.5 m are reported in fewer than 
10% of observations, though waves of up to 13 m have 
been reported. In summer, very rough seas do occur, but 
are unusual, and slight seas with waves 0.5 m or less are 
reported on over 64% of observations.
 Swells are mostly from the NW and NE. In summer 
they are generally low. Heights of 1 m or less are recorded 
in about 50% of observations. Swells exceeding 4 m in 
height are unusual, though in autumn swells up to 15 m 
can  occur  in  the  E  (presumably  beyond  the  region  of 
interest here).
 There is an anticlockwise current   in  the  Black  Sea. 
According  to  the  Black Sea Pilot   its  velocity  along  the 
western part of the southern coast is 0.25 to 0.75 knots 
in general. It is greatest after the melting of the snows in 
late  spring  and  early  summer.  The  latest  edition  of  the 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (referring I think to the Black Sea 
as a whole) gives 40–60 cm/sec (0.78–1.17 knots) as the 
velocity of circulation near to the shore, but less further 
out. The Black Sea Pilot  says the circulation is “weak and 
inconstant ... Countercurrents ... occur between the main 
current and the shore in many places.”
 Humidity: in summer in the S and SE coasts the relative 
humidity is around 85% in the early morning falling to 
about 70% in the afternoon.
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
T able 7.1. Currents and counter currents (eddies) encountered during the preferred course; durations if the ship’s speed is 7.5 
knots relative to the water.
* Allowing for leeway during the crossing
===== PAGE 78 =====
7. From the Golden Horn to Heraclea: duration of the passage in calm weather 65
 T emperature: in July and August, the air temperature 
reaches its maximum, and mean daily temperatures range 
between maxima of 25–30 °C and minima of 17–19 °C. 
The  extreme  highest  temperatures   recorded  in  coastal 
districts are generally around 38–41 °C but over the open 
sea the extreme maxima are generally around 27–32 °C.
  The  ranges   of  temperature,   relative   humidity   and 
windspeed at Istanbul and Zonguldak (east of Heraclea/
Eregli) for the months April–September are given in Table 
7.2.
  In  each  case  the  first-given  temperature  is  the  mean 
daily minimum for the month and the other is the mean 
daily maximum.
  Extremes sometimes well beyond these can occur. The 
first-given R.H. is the average humidity at 0700 and the 
other is at 1400. The first-given wind is the mean at 0700 
and the other is at 1400. Zonguldak is on the south coast 
further east than Heraclea.
  I  assume  that  an  ancient  trireme  would  have  been 
steered close enough to the shore to benefit from the faster 
current there, whose magnitude I take to be 0.5 m/s, the 
middle of the range given by Encyclopaedia Britannica.
  The data on the temperature and humidity confirm the 
importance of ventilating the ship to cool the oarsmen.
  The   windspeeds   confirm   that   very   light   winds 
predominate   during  the  ancient  “sailing”  season,  and 
bearing in mind the information to be given in my paper 
on ‘The performance of ancient triremes in wind and waves’ 
below it is not surprising that on the whole the waves are 
low.
2.4. Duration of the voyage after leaving  
the Bosporus, and total duration
We may take the distance from the northern end of the 
Bosporus  to  Heraclea  as  113  n.m.  (say  210  km).  The 
times taken by the ship to cover this distance at steady 
speeds of 7, 7.5 and 8 knots relative to the water, given 
a helpful current of 0.5 m/s (about 1 knot) are given in 
Table 7.3.
  These durations exclude any time spent resting at mid-day.
  Adding together the times spent rowing up the Bosporus 
and in the Black Sea and allowing an hour’s rest at mid-day, 
about half-way into the journey, ignoring any progress that 
might be made during that rest by virtue of the current 
and recalling that calm weather is assumed, I obtain the 
durations given in Table 7.4 for the total journey time:
  Say 17h 50m, 16h 50m and 15h 50m respectively.
  If there were after all a slight tail wind or onshore wind, 
not strong enough to raise hampering waves, say a true 
wind of 4 m/s or 8 knots, it would give virtually no help 
when the ship was under oar (and if it were from astern 
it could well cause the men to overheat while they were 
rowing) but it could drive the ship on at about 4 knots 
during the hour’s rest. This would gain 4 n.m. or about 
7.5 km, about 3% of the total distance, reducing the total 
durations given above by about half an hour. The current 
of about 1 knot on its own would gain about 1 n.m. worth 
about 8 minutes.
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
T able 7.2.


  


  
T able 7.3. Times under oar, Bosporus exit to Heraclea, 210 km with helpful current of 0.5 m/s (1 knot):
   

   
   
T able 7.4. T otal journey time, Golden Horn to Heraclea
===== PAGE 79 =====
Timothy Shaw66
2.5. Power required
The  power  required  by  Olympias  at  various  speeds  was 
deduced by Grekoussis and Loukakis from tank tests of 
a bare hulled model and their results were reproduced by 
Lowry and Squire in the form of a graph (Grekoussis and 
Loukakis 1985; Lowry and Squire 1988). By examining 
this  graph  I  have  found  that  the  power  consumption 
of  Olympias  with  rudders  partly  raised  to  reduce  their 
resistance can be expressed by the formula:
Power in watts = 155V3 + 4.13V5
Where V is the speed in m/s.
I suggest that the power required by a Mark II trireme 
reconstruction would be about 8% more than this because 
of her probably greater length and displacement. If the 
whole  oarcrew  were  in  action  the  effective  power  per 
man would be 1/170 of this larger quantity but of course 
each man must do still more because of the inefficiency 
of  the  oars  and  their  inertia  which  both  absorb  power 
unavoidably. The man must develop much more power 
than  is  absorbed  by  the  ship.  If  I  assign  a  mean  ideal 
efficiency of 0.78 to the oars (see my paper ‘Towards a 
revised design of a Greek trireme’ on pp. 76–81 below) 
and adopt the formula
power in watts absorbed by the trireme oar = 
   0.96r + 0.016r2
where r is the rate of striking (Shaw 1993a; for the method 
of calculating the rates of striking which follow, see the 
Appendix to this Paper and pp. 76–81 below)
and if I take  r = 25.5 when speed = 7 knots
  r = 28.8 when speed = 7.5 knots, and
  r = 32.3 when speed = 8 knots
then I find that to the nearest 5 W the gross power to be 
exerted per oarsman is
    115 W at 7 knots
    145 W at 7.5 knots, and
    180 W at 8 knots
The graph of power a man can exert continuously against 
the duration of the exercise shows that hardened manual 
labourers, if kept cool and given adequate sustenance in 
the form of easily digestible food and drink, could exert 
180 watts for just under two hours, 145 watts for about 
7½  hours  and  (if  the  straight  line  can  be  extrapolated) 
115 watts for as long as 30 hours (based on the study by 
Scherrer et al. 1981 of sugar-cane cutters in Queensland, 
Australia; see Shaw 1993b, 65, fig. 10.4 (reproduced here as 
Fig. 7.1) and the paper by Coates on ‘Human mechanical 
power’ on pp. 161–4 below); whereas men of the ability 
of Kanellos Kanellopoulos, (who in 1988 flew under his 
own  power  from  Crete  to  Santorini)  could  sustain  180 
watts for about 13 hours, 170 watts for about 16½ hours 
(Nadel and Bussolari 1988) (Fig. 7.1). (It is hoped that 
further information on stamina will become available in 
the future.)
  I  retabulate  here  the  duration  of  the  voyage  at  the 
three speeds, and at the stronger of the Bosporus currents 
assumed earlier:
Figure 7.1. The gross mechanical power of athletes of various kinds in relation to the duration of their efforts (from Shaw 
1993b, 65, fig. 10.4).
===== PAGE 80 =====
7. From the Golden Horn to Heraclea: duration of the passage in calm weather 67
At 7 knots  17 hours 50 min. including an hour’s rest
At 7.5 knots  16 hours 50 min. including an hour’s rest
At 8 knots  15 hours 50 min. including an hour’s rest
From  these  data  it  follows  that  a  crew  consisting   of 
men whose power and stamina equalled that of modern 
manual labourers could probably sustain a speed above 7 
knots but not as much as 7.5 knots, i.e. they could row 
from Byzantium to Heraclea in a time of about 18 hours 
(including  an  hour’s  stoppage  at  mid-day).  This  would 
involve rowing by the light of the moon for part of the 
way. A crew of clones of Kanellopoulos could perhaps forgo 
the mid-day rest and if they did so they might complete 
the voyage in as little as 15 hours. Such a voyage could 
be about 90% completed while the sun was up during a 
few weeks either side of midsummer but at other times 
the help of the moon would be required.
3. Conclusion
It looks as though a moderately good trireme crew capable 
of cruising at about 7¼ knots relative to the water, if given 
appropriate  nutrition,  a  fast  and  well-ventilated  ship,  a 
good  set  of  oars  and  calm  weather,  could  complete  the 
passage between Byzantium (say the Golden Horn) and 
Heraclea (modern Eregli) in about 18 hours if they rested 
for an hour in mid-voyage. (They would probably need 
to do that.) If they started out at 0400 they would reach 
their destination at about 2200. An elite crew cruising at 
nearly 8 knots might not need to stop half way and might 
then complete the passage in about 15 hours.
  It  seems   reasonable   to  regard   these   durations   as 
consistent with Xenophon’s “long day”. If we are to believe 
Xenophon (and why not: he had no reason to lie) it follows 
that the ability to cruise at 7–8 knots (depending on the 
standard  of  the  oarcrew)  is  one  of  the  most  important 
criteria by which any ship claiming to be a reconstruction 
of an ancient Greek fast trireme should be judged.
Appendix
Calculation of rates of striking (See  also  my  paper  on 
‘Towards a revised design of a Greek trireme’ below.)
nPrLE/60 = 1.08 × (155V3 + 4.13V5)
V is in m/s; 1 knot = 0.5148 m/s
n = 170, P = 7,43r, L = 0.99 m, E = 0.78
The equation shows that:
When   V = 7 knots  r is 25.47 say 25.5 spm
  V = 7.5 knots  r is 28.77 say 28.8 spm
  V = 8 knots  r is 32.32 say 32.3 spm.
Bibliography
Admiralty Chart No. 1198 (The Bosporus)  (1995). Taunton, 
Hydrographer of the Navy.
Black Sea Pilot (Sailing Directions). London, HMSO
Brown’s Nautical Almanack 1988   (1988).  Glasgow, Brown, 
Son and Ferguson Ltd.
Grekoussis, C. and Loukakis, T . (1985) Athenian Trireme Calm 
Water T ests Without Ram. National T echnical University of 
Athens. Report No. NAL 06–F-1985. Athens,  National 
T echnical University of Athens.
Lowry,  I.  J.  and  Squire,  T.  M.  (1988)  Trireme Olympias 
Extended Sea Trials. Cardiff, UWIST University of Wales 
College of Cardiff. Unpublished.
Morrison, J. S. (1991) Ancient Greek Measures of Length in 
Nautical Contexts. Antiquity 65 (No. 247), 298–305.
Nadel, E. R. and Bussolari, S. R. (1988) The Daedalus Project: 
Physiological Problems and Solutions. American Scientist 
(July-August), 351–360.
Scherrer, J. et al. (1981) Précis de physiologie du travail, notions 
d’ergonomie (2nd ed. Paris, Masson et Cie.
Shaw, J. T . (1993a) Rowing in Ships and Boats. Transactions 
of the Royal Institution of Naval Architects 194B, 211–22
Shaw, J. T . (1993b) The Trireme Project. Operational Experience 
1987–90. Lessons Learnt. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
===== PAGE 81 =====
8.  The Performance of Ancient T riremes  
in Wind and Waves
1. Summary
This note argues that ancient triremes did not need help 
from the sails when they made the fast passage between 
Byzantium and Heraclea referred to by Xenophon as being 
achievable in “a long day under oar”. Nor would a wind 
strong enough to offer useful propulsive force all the way 
in the Black Sea have been helpful in fact: in such a long 
passage it would have eventually have raised waves high 
enough to negate the benefit. The main reason for this is 
the ship’s high speed of 7 to 8 knots.
2. Introduction
It is acknowledged that Olympias is incapable of cruising 
all day at 7–8 knots under oar. Her cramped stateroom 
has  been  blamed,  an  explanation  that  is  supported  by 
physiological   studies  including  The  T rireme  T rust’s  in 
1990 and 1994. These data when coupled with the known 
resistance/speed curve of Olympias confirm that a carefully-
selected and well-trained all-male oarcrew whose stature is 
similar to that attributed to ancient Greek men ought to 
have enough power and endurance to match the ancient 
performance  with  no  help  from  the  sails  provided  that 
the  men  have  enough  stateroom  to  row  at  full  length. 
I  have  argued  that  a  suitably  lengthened  stateroom  can 
be  provided  within  an  interscalmium   of  0.98  m  (two 
cubits) by strongly ‘skewing’ the layout of the seats and 
stretchers   (Shaw  1994).  This  concept  has  been  given 
detailed expression in Plan 201–12 (Fig. 8.1) which closely 
resembles Plan 8 (Olympias) (Fig. 8.2) apart from the three 
main changes: the skewed oar-rig, an increase in the height 
of the zyga and a 10% increase in the interscalmium.
  However,  and  perhaps  not  surprisingly,  it  has  been 
suggested  elsewhere  that  (a)  the  passage  referred  to  by 
Xenophon  must  have  been  sail-assisted  and/or  (b)  an 
ancient trireme was not like Olympias at all.
  As regards (b), I will not go beyond stating that there is 
massive evidence unrelated to the present discussion that an 
ancient trireme’s hull and main principles of her oarsystem 
were very like those of Olympias and Plan 201–12.
Timothy Shaw
  Here,  I  am  concerned  with  the  impact  of  (a)  given 
that the ship is as shown in Plan 201–12. The question 
is important, for if (a) were correct, we should no longer 
be  able  to  insist  on  a  high  cruising  speed  for  a  trireme 
under oar, and the case for improving important details 
of the design would therefore be based on rather weaker 
evidence than would exist if Xenophon’s statement were 
accepted. We should find ourselves relying not on verifiable 
or potentially verifiable figures but on a mere opinion that 
ancient  ship  designers  would  not  deliberately  restrict  a 
crew’s length of stroke if they could help it.
  This  document  shows  that  (a)  cannot  be  true  if  an 
ancient trireme was like that depicted in Plan 201–12. As I 
show in what follows, any tailwind strong enough to offer 
a useful thrust via the sails at a ship’s speed as high as 7 to 
8 knots would after blowing for a few hours across a ‘fetch’ 
of some scores of kilometres raise waves high enough to 
hinder the oarsmen, or worse, and so negate the benefit. 
A passage at that speed under sail alone is ruled out by 
the fact that if the ship were no more seaworthy than the 
Olympias was for good reasons designed to be, she would 
be obliged by the waves to seek shelter before reaching 
Heraclea. A wind on the beam is no help either.
  If I am right, it would follow that where the wind, if 
any, had a long ‘fetch’, the fastest passages by the triremes 
were made under oar, and in calm weather, and that when 
Xenophon said or wrote “under oar” he meant precisely 
that, not “under sail and oar” and not “under sail”. This 
does not rule out that slower passages by triremes between 
Byzantium  and  Heraclea  were  conducted  under  sail  or 
under sail and oar in light winds.
3. Discussion
First I discuss the propulsive effect of the wind via the sails, 
making use of our experiences in Olympias. Then I give the 
effect of the wind on the waves. Then I go into the effect 
of the waves on the ship and on the rowing, again making 
use of experience in Olympias. I mention the importance 
of ventilating the ship. The conclusions follow.
===== PAGE 82 =====
8. The Performance of Ancient Triremes in Wind and Waves 69
3.1. The propulsive effect of the wind
In my paper ‘From the Golden Horn to Heraclea’ above, 
I  show  that  in  order  to  complete  the  passage  between 
Byzantium and Heraclea in “a long day” a trireme must 
sustain  a  speed  of  between  7  and  8  knots  (3.6  to  4.1 
m/s) through the water. Here, in order to minimise the 
number of tables, I deal with the mean of these namely 
7½ knots or say 3.9 m/s. While in the Black Sea the ship 
would be assisted, according to the Black Sea Pilot, by an 
anticlockwise current of ¼ to ¾ knots (13–39 cm/sec), the 
higher values occurring in spring and early summer. The 
latest Encyclopaedia Britannica says the current amounts 
to 40–60 cm/sec near the shore but less farther out. I shall 
assume the ship steers near enough the shore to benefit 
from a current of 0.5 m/s (1 knot).
  Our experiments on sailing Olympias have shown that 
her speed in still water is at best rather less than half the 
true  wind  speed,  whether  the  wind  is  astern  or  on  the 
beam. A tailwind needs to blow at about 8.5 m/s (16.5 
knots, which is Force 4 bordering on 5) if it is to propel 
the ship under full sail through still water at the postulated 
3.9 m/s (7.5 knots) with no help from the oars. A wind 
on the beam needs a velocity of about 9.8 m/s (19 knots, 
which  is  Force  5).  The  error  of  the  ship’s  log  has  been 
taken into account.
  It has long been suggested that the sails could safely be 
enlarged (Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 36). This could 
reduce the required windspeed by a few percent. On the 
other hand the proposed improved version of  Olympias 
given  in  Plan  201–12  will  probably  have  a  little  more 
resistance, tending to restore the original relationship. In 
what follows I assume that a tailwind of 8.5 m/s (16.5 
knots) or a beam wind of 9.8 m/s (19 knots) will still be 
required to drive a Mark II trireme through still water at 
3.9 m/s (7.5 knots) under sail.
  To obtain the propulsive force of gentler winds, such 
as  might,  with  the  help  of  the  oars,  enable  the  ship  to 
continue at 3.9 m/s (7.5 knots), consider the following.
Figure 8.1. Proposed modification to Olympias oar-rig, with interscalmium of 0.98 m and skewed layout of seats and stretchers 
(Plan 201–12) (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 83 =====
Timothy Shaw70
  Take the case of a wind from astern. We may assume 
that the usual square law of air resistance applies to the sails 
in this case, and that the same sail area is used irrespective 
of the strength of the wind as no very strong winds are 
being considered. Then we have that:
  Resistance  of  the  ship  at  3.9  m/s  (7.5  knots)  in  still 
water = propulsive force of an 8.5 m/s (16.5 knots) true 
wind  from  astern  which  is  a  4.6  m/s  (8.9  knots)  wind 
relative to the ship.
  Since the ship must continue to move at 3.9 m/s (7.5 
knots)  through  the  water  which  is  itself  moving  in  the 
same direction at 0.5 m/s (1 knot), a true windspeed of 
V m/s coming from astern implies a relative wind of (V 
– 3.9 – 0.5) m/s and a propulsive force proportional to 
that quantity squared. (The coefficient of proportionality 
is a constant if the sail area is unchanged.) It follows that 
when the ship is in the Black Sea the propulsive force of 
the wind of true speed V is a percentage X of that of a 
relative wind of 4.6 m/s (8.9 knots) where:
X = 100 [(V – 3.9 – 0.5)/4.6]2
Table 8.1 shows, for example, that when the true wind 
speed is 5 m/s (9.7 knots) the speed of the relative wind 
pressing on the sails is only 0.6 m/s (1.2 knots) and this 
reduces  the  oarsmen’s  burden  by  only  about  2%.  The 
table  suggests  that  higher  windspeeds  would  be  much 
more helpful but this will be true only if the wind has had 
insufficient time and ‘fetch’ to raise waves high enough 
to hamper the oarsmen. Details of the average roughness 
of the sea caused by steady winds of true velocities 5, 5.5 
and  6  m/s  (9.7,  10.7  and  11.7  knots)  are  given  in  the 
next section.
  I  now  consider  the  case  of  a  wind  on  the  beam. To 
give enough propulsive force to drive the ship at 3.9 m/s 
(7.5 knots) through the water without help from the oars 
a beam wind has to be fairly strong. It is perhaps worth 
re-emphasising the point that it is because the ship’s speed 
is high, i.e. about 4.4 m/s (8.5 knots) past the land, that 
the wind is unhelpful. Suppose the wind’s true direction 
is at 90 degrees to the ship’s course. Then the angle by 
which the direction of the apparent wind differs from the 
ship’s course is that whose tangent is the true wind speed 
divided by the ship’s speed past the land. Table 8.2 gives 
examples.
  T o find the wind direction in degrees from the ship’s 
heading  a  leeway  angle  of  say  7  degrees  needs  to  be 
subtracted from the tabulated angles. Table 8.2 shows that 
the ship has to be sailed more and more close-hauled as the 
Figure 8.2: Existing arrangement of mid-section in Olympias (Plan 8) (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 84 =====
8. The Performance of Ancient Triremes in Wind and Waves 71
wind drops. Owain Roberts has written that “Olympias will 
sail well up to 60 degrees off the apparent wind making 
no more than 7 degrees leeway” (Shaw 1993b, 37). This 
I take to mean that her course may come as close as 67 
degrees from the direction of the apparent wind. According 
to Table 8.2 this calls for a true windspeed of more than 
10 m/s (19.4 knots) if the true wind is at 90 degrees to the 
course made good. (This exceeds the quantity of 9.8 m/s (19 
knots) assumed earlier because the ship’s speed is 4.4 m/s 
(8..5 knots) not 3.9 m/s (7.5 knots)). Dr Basil Greenhill 
and Peter Allington, have explained that that the use of 
auxiliary power enables a sailing ship rigged as a schooner to 
point higher than normal (Greenhill and Allington 1993). 
On reading that, we might guess that under oar plus sail 
a trireme could point as much as 5 degrees higher than 
stated by Roberts. On their next page however, Greenhill 
and  Allington  say  that  “a  square-rigged  vessel’s  lack  of 
weatherliness effectively meant that she could not motor-
sail to windward.” Even if we ignore that, and accept a 5 
degree improvement, the windspeed is still required to be 
as  much  as  8.3  m/s  (16  knots).  This  windspeed  should 
keep the oarsmen cool but it would also be incompatible 
with fast rowing, indeed it may prevent all rowing as the 
ship  would  heel  and  probably  also  roll  because  of  the 
waves created, even if the wind itself were steady. Coates 
and Morrison wrote in the first edition of  The Athenian 
Trireme  that  a  steady  beam  wind  of  14  knots  [which  is 
only 7.2 m/s] would cause [the then unbuilt] Olympias to 
heel about 8 degrees under the action of both sails, or 7 
degrees without the boat sail (Morrison and Coates 1986, 
223). This would put the thalamian oarports very near the 
water on the lee side (Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 35, 
fig. 19 gives a good impression of the situation).
  If we reduce the windspeed to a level at which the angle 
of the heel is small enough and the waves low enough to 
permit hard rowing we find from Table 8.2 that if the ship’s 
speed is somehow maintained at 4.4 m/s (8.5 knots) the 
apparent wind is too near the ship’s head and its propulsive 
effect will be nil.
  There are a few more points. Suppose the ship steers 
fairly near the shore and makes use of an offshore (i.e. a 
southerly) wind which has only a short fetch and duration 
of action on the water. Such a wind however will not arise 
till the late evening, will blow during the night, and die 
out  soon  after  sunrise.  And  even  if  part  of  the  passage 
were  made  by  moonlight  (which  I  show  above  in  my 
paper ‘From the Golden Horn to Heraclea’ was probably 
sometimes the case in antiquity) the night would not be 
long enough for the offshore wind to take the ship very 
far. An onshore wind, on the other hand, arising about 
mid-morning and continuing until evening may raise fairly 
high waves.
3.2. The effect of the wind on the waves
I  am  indebted  to  Mr  D.  J. T.  Carter,  sometime  of  the 
institute  of  Oceanographic  Sciences,  Wormley,  Surrey, 
and  now  of  Satellite  Observation  Services,  Godalming, 
for  the  information   that  has  enabled  me  to  give  the 
wave  heights  and  other  wave  data  in  what  follows.  His 
equations are given in his 1982 paper ‘Prediction of Wave 
Height and Period for a Constant Wind Velocity using 
the JONSWAP Results’. They express and summarise the 
findings of the Joint North Sea Wave Project of 1969 and 
they are considered to be applicable to conditions in the 
south-western part of the Black Sea. They refer to winds 
measured at a height of 10 m above the mean sea surface, 
acting for various durations and over various lengths of 
fetch, over water that is deep enough that the sea floor 
does not influence the waves, and in the absence of swell. 
Carter has kindly supplemented this information by means 
of a personal communication.











   
   
   
   
   
   
T able 8.1.
     



    
T able 8.2.
===== PAGE 85 =====
Timothy Shaw72
  In reality of course the wind does not have a constant 
velocity but we may still draw valid conclusions from the 
equations.
  I should mention that Carter’s equations are not the 
only ones one might use. Others give somewhat different 
answers but they are thought to be more appropriate for 
large oceans such as the North Atlantic than for the limited 
fetch of westerly winds in the south-western Black Sea.
  Carter’s equations give us H, the so-called ‘significant 
height’ of the waves measured from crest to trough, and 
the time T that elapses (on average) between successive 
occasions on which the sea surface rises above its mean 
level. I have obtained the wavelength L from the formula 
L = 1.56 T2 and the wave velocity C from the formula  
C =  1.56  T.  The  coefficient  1.56  applies  when  L  is  in 
metres, C is in metres/second and T is in seconds.
  The significant height H of the waves is a measure of 
the average roughness of the sea, and I should make it clear 
that the quantities given as T, L and C are also averages 
masking considerable variation. For statisticians it may be 
mentioned that to a good approximation the elevation of 
the sea’s surface has a Gaussian distribution. The significant 
wave height is defined as four times the standard deviation 
of that elevation, i.e. at any given location that elevation 
fluctuates  by  up  to  two  standard  deviations  above  and 
two below its mean level for about 95% of the time. If 
the  distribution  were  truly  Gaussian  the  surface  would 
be  found  at  2  or  more  standard  deviations  away  from 
the mean about 4.6% of the time, 2½ or more standard 
deviations   away  about  1.2%  of  the  time,  3  or  more 
standard deviations away about 0.27% of the time and 4 
or more standard deviations away only about 0.006% of 
the time. This means, for example, that if the significant 
wave height of a fully-developed sea is 0.50 m and the 
period is 2.58 seconds, then in a time-span of 8 hours, 
about  7.63  hours  will  see  the  passage  of  about  10,650 
waves  of  up  to  0.50  m,  but  the  remaining  22  minutes 
will see higher waves (distributed at random throughout 
the whole 8 hours): there will be about 16 minutes’ worth 
of waves between 0.50 and 0.625 m, about 4½ minutes’ 
worth of waves between 0.625 and 0.75 m, and about 1¼ 
minutes’ worth of waves between 0.75 and 1.00 m. A wave 
of height greater than 1.00 m is unlikely to occur in eight 
hours if the significant height is 0.50 m, but it is found 
that every interval of 3 hours is likely to see a wave whose 
height is as much as 0.9 m, i.e. 1.8 times the significant 
height for the given duration or fetch, and windspeed.
  We are considering a passage in an easterly direction 
from the northern exit of the Bosporus along the southern 
coast of the Black Sea where the ‘fetch’ of westerly winds 
increases  as  the  ship  proceeds.  Since  Heraclea  is  about 
113 nautical miles (say 210 km) from the Bosporus, this 
is the greatest ‘fetch’ that concerns us if the wind is from 
the  west.  I  shall  present  the  significant  wave  heights  at 
50, 100, 150 and 200 km of fetch, corresponding (by an 
argument explained below) to durations of about 3.2, 6.3, 
9.5, and 12.6 hours respectively. The greatest fetch in the 
JONSWAP work was 160 km so in quoting for 200 km 
I am guilty of a slight extrapolation.
  T o avoid exaggerating the waves I shall discuss a simple 
case in which the sea is calm initially; but early in the morning 
as the ship emerges from the Bosporus the wind springs up 
uniformly all along the course and blows steadily thereafter.
  As the ship is to cruise at 3.9 m/s (7.5 knots) through 
the water its overall speed is 4.4 m/s (8.5 knots) and so it 
takes 3.2 hours to cover 50 km, 6.3 hours to cover 100 
km, 9.5 hours to cover 150 km and 12.6 hours to cover 
200 km. Hence in the postulated conditions, by the time 
the ship reaches the 50 km point the wind will have been 
blowing for 3.2 hours; when the ship reaches the 100 km 
point the wind will have been blowing for 6.3 hours, and 
so on. The propulsive action of the wind will be uniform 
the whole way. As the durations are fairly short, the waves 
mostly do not reach their full potential development: the 
sea  is  still  growing.  I  have  omitted  the  duration  of  the 
mid-day rest the crew may have taken.
  As I have assumed a favourable current of 0.5 m/s (1 
knot), the windspeeds in relation to the water are reduced 
by that amount in Table 8.3 which gives the significant 
wave height H, the mean wavelength L (both in metres) 
and the mean wave velocity C in m/s. W is the windspeed 
in m/s relative to the water.
  From Carter’s formulae I have obtained the data shown 
in Table 8.3.
  I  should  add  that  the  significant   height  of  waves 
generated by an 8.5 m/s (16.5 knots) wind relative to the 
water – one strong enough to propel the ship at 3.9 m/s 
(7.5 knots) through the water via the sails only – would, at 
200 km and 12.6 hours, be about 1.4 m, with a wavelength 
of about 28 m.




  
        
          
          
          
          
T able 8.3. An asterisk means that the sea has reached its full development at the given windspeed, duration and fetch. The 
wave velocity C is measured with respect to the water which is itself moving at 0.5 m/s (1 knot). A wave having C above 3.9 
m/s (7.5 knots) will overtake the ship.
===== PAGE 86 =====
8. The Performance of Ancient Triremes in Wind and Waves 73
  As  I  have  explained,   some  waves  must  exceed  the 
significant height. The “3 hour” heights are given in Table 
8.4. That for an 8.5 m/s (16.5 knot) wind at 200 km, 12.6 
hours is 2.5 m. Its wavelength would be about 34 m.
  In Table  8.4  the  heights  H,  lengths  L  and  velocities 
C are 1.8 times, 1.2 times, and 1.1 times those given in 
Table 8.3 for the same fetch, duration and windspeed. For 
these factors I am indebted to Carter.
3.3. The effect of the waves on the ship 
For reasons explained in The Trireme Project, Olympias was 
designed and built to withstand a wave of height 0.8 m 
and wavelength equal to the waterline length of the ship, 
about 33 m. Such a wave would not strain the hull. The 
scantlings of the principal timbers were made the same as 
those measured by Miss H. Frost at the wreck of a Punic 
‘long’ ship off Marsala. A trireme built in accordance with 
Plan 201–12 would observe the same criterion. The sills of 
her thalamian oarports (closed by the askomata) would be 
about 0.3 m above the calm waterline (so that a wave of 
height 0.6 m would wet them) and those of the zygians 
about  1.0  m  above  it.  It  is  believed  that  ancient  Greek 
triremes were no more seaworthy than this.
  Of  course  the  3-hour  wave  2.5  m  high  and  34  m 
long for a windspeed of 8.5 m/s (16.5 knots) at a fetch 
of 200 km and a duration of 12.6 hours would severely 
strain the ship. Waves of the significant height for those 
conditions, about 1.4 m, would also strain and damage 
the hull structure if their heading were similar to that of 
the ship, as their wavelength, about 28 m, appears long 
enough that the hull would at times be supported on only 
one  crest.  If  the  hull  remained  intact  and  upright  such 
waves would not swamp the ship but they would make 
rowing impossible.
  In the less severe conditions associated with a windspeed 
of 5.5 m/s (10.7 knots) some waves will eventually rise 
to a height of about 1.3 m but the wavelength of about 
18 m should ensure that the hull is always supported on 
at least two crests. The ship may therefore survive but as 
shown below, rowing will still be impossible.
3.4. The effect of the waves on the rowing
Here I should explain that the style of rowing I advocate to 
enable a fast trireme to attain the highest possible cruising 
speed in smooth and slight seas is not that of Burlet and 
Zysberg  in  which  the  stroke  is  short  and  the  depth  of 
immersion of the oarblade is much greater at midstroke 
than at the catch and finish (Burlet and Zysberg, 1986; cf. 
Burlet et al. 1986; Bondioli et al. 1995). The style of Burlet 
and Zysberg would have to be adopted in rough water but 
it would not yield the highest speed in smooth and slight 
seas. For that, one needs a long stroke. The blade is fully 
immersed  as  quickly  as  possible  at  the  catch,  thereafter 
remaining at more-or-less constant depth (if the water is 
flat) until it is cleanly extracted at the finish. This entails 
that to a good approximation any given point on the oar 
moves from catch to finish in a horizontal, circular arc in 
relation  to  the  ship.  The  more  skilful  the  oarsmanship, 
the  closer  the  approximation  although  a  slight  increase 
in depth of immersion towards midstroke does no harm 
provided that the instantaneous turning point of the oar 
in relation to undisturbed water is not immersed.
  Smooth swells of great height may be compatible with 
such a style of rowing if the wavelength is so great that the 
ship rises to them. Such waves certainly occur from time 
to time in the Black Sea but in the conditions considered 
here they will be overlain by the short waves whose data 
has been tabulated.
  In what follows I draw on experience gained during the 
sea trials of Olympias. Although she cannot be cruised at 
3.9 m/s (7.5 knots) experience in her is instructive and 
relevant. It indicates that if a trireme remains on a even 
keel  without  significant  pitching,  good  progress  under 
oar can be maintained for 3 or 4 hours in short waves of 
height up to about 0.30 m (the crests rising about 0.15m 
up  the  ship’s  side):  in  a  ship  built  in  accordance  with 
Plan 201–12 a well-trained and determined crew should 
be able to row strongly and at full length in waves of this 
height although we have yet to demonstrate that such an 
effort  could  be  sustained  all  day  in  such  waves.  Waves  
0.3 m high would have a wavelength of about 5 m. The 
ship would overtake them at a relative speed of about 1 
m/s (2 knots). There could be about 7 crests in the wetted 
length of the ship.
  From Table 8.3 it appears that a trireme could maintain 
reasonably good progress under oar for at least the first 
50 km and 3.2 hours in a tailwind of up to 5.5 m/s (10.7 
knots) relative to the water, the wind arising as the ship 
leaves the Bosporus, as the significant height of the waves 
does not exceed 0.3 m. The rowing would occasionally be 




  
        
          
          
          
          
T able 8.4. Height, etc., of the “Three-hour” wave, m. An asterisk means the sea is fully developed. H. L, C and W have the 
same meanings as in T able 8.3.
===== PAGE 87 =====
Timothy Shaw74
rendered more difficult by larger waves of heights up to 
those of the 3-hour waves of Table IV at the given fetch 
and  duration.  But  the  assistance  afforded  by  the  wind 
via the sails would be slight, only 12 percent of the total 
thrust as shown for a true wind of 6 m/s (11.7 knots) in 
Table 8.1.
  At  longer  distances  and  durations  the  picture  looks 
less rosy. The crew of a ship built in accordance with Plan 
201–12 would not be able to maintain their long stroke 
in waves more than about 0.5 m in height (the crests then 
giving about the same effect, at the blade tips, as a heel of 
3 degrees) because they would have to adjust the heights 
of their blades to the crests and troughs. With increasing 
wave height, oarsmen would have to adopt progressively 
shorter  but  less  powerful  strokes  so  that  their  rowing 
would  become  more  like  that  employed  in  later  galleys 
as described by Burlet and Zysberg and as used in oared 
seaboats generally (though not in Cornish racing gigs).
  Most  waves  of  height  0.5  m  would  keep  pace  with 
the ship; higher ones would overtake her. Because of the 
fore-and-aft oscillation of the water the men whose blades 
were in the crests would have to pull much harder than 
those whose blades were in the troughs (assuming the latter 
could reach the water) impairing uniformity and making 
timekeeping difficult.
  I conclude that it is not possible to continue rowing 
powerfully  enough  to  sustain  a  cruising  speed  of  7.5 
knots  in  a  trireme  when  the  significant  height  of  the 
waves  exceeds  about  0.5  m.  Even  in  a  wind  as  light  as 
one  of  5.5  m/s  (10.7  knots)  relative  to  the  water  these 
conditions would arise well before 150 km and 9.5 hours, 
and difficulties caused by waves greater than the significant 
height would become more serious than they would be in 
the first 50 km.
  Further effects of waves higher than 0.5 m are considered 
below.
  As mentioned earlier, the leather seals of the thalamian 
oarports would begin to be wetted when the water came 
up to about 0.3 m, implying a wave height of 0.6 m if 
their  were  no  rolling,  pitching  or  heaving.  Possibly  the 
thalamian oars could still be used but their power would 
be small. If the water came up 0.4 m (wave height about 
0.8m) the thalamian oars would have to be drawn in and 
the power of the other oars would be severely reduced. 
(Of the three levels of oarsmen the thalamians are put out 
of action first, reducing the already limited oarpower by 
a third.)
  As the waves rise they make it progressively harder for 
the  blades  to  reach  the  water  in  the  troughs  and  to  be 
recovered when buried in the crests. Certain photographs 
of the Olympias in a swell, when compared with an elevation 
drawing of the ship, show that waves rising no more than 
about 0.4 m above the calm waterline were more than high 
enough to have this effect; the thalamian oars were out of 
action. Furthermore the wave height was less than twice 
this figure because the height to which some of the crests 
rose in relation to the ship was enhanced by the pitching 
and heaving of the ship. These measurements discredit a 
statement reported on p. 40 of  The Trireme Trials 1988 
that the whole crew had rowed (admittedly only a short 
distance) in waves of up to 1.2 m. The whole crew did row 
but the height of the waves was overestimated. According 
to a statement on p. 45 of The Trireme Trials 1988 waves 
1.0 m in height caused problems to some oarsmen (they 
were thranites and zygians, the thalamian oars having been 
drawn in). The report goes on to describe the conditions 
as  “very  difficult…when  three  big  waves  came  together 
they seriously disrupted the stroke and it appeared that 
these conditions were about on the limit for rowing at two 
levels”. The occasion was that on which the photographs 
referred to were taken and it would seem that the wave 
height given in that report was an overestimate.
  According  to Table  8.3  the  significant  height  of  the 
waves  raised  by  a  5.5  m/s  (10.7  knot)  wind  relative  to 
the water would reach 0.65 m at 150 km and 9.5 hours; 
and  I  propose  that  this  rules  out  any  hope  of  a  strong 
rowing performance in such a wind beyond this distance 
and duration. Table 8.4 shows that occasional disruption 
of the rowing by such waves would set in much sooner 
and of course it would become much more frequent and 
more severe as the voyage progressed and the waves grew 
higher.
  As already mentioned, the 3-hour wave raised by a 5.5 
m/s (10.7 knot) wind relative to the water at 200 km and 
12.6 hours has a height of about 1.3 m. It would overtake 
the  ship  at  a  relative  speed  of  about  1.4  m/s.  Rowing 
would  become  impossible.  The  thalamians,  of  course, 
would be completely out of action. Although the sills of 
the zygian oarports are 1.0 m above the mean water level, 
and so a wave of height 1.3 m rising 0.65 above the calm 
waterline would not reach them if the ship remained on a 
even keel and did not heave or pitch severely, such a wave 
would make it very difficult for the zygian and thranite 
oarsmen to reach the water in the troughs and impossible 
for them to recover their blades if they were buried in the 
crests. The reason for this is that although the thranites, 
zygians and thalamians sit at different heights the height 
above  calm  water  to  which  they  can  lift  their  blades  is 
little if any higher for the upper two levels than it is for 
the thalamians. This is because they all have to reach calm 
water  with  their  blades  without  raising  their  hands  too 
high and therefore they all have about the same scope for 
lowering  their  oarlooms  to  their  thighs  at  the  recovery. 
Finally, a pitch amplitude of 1 degree either side of the 
horizontal would alternately raise and lower the foremost 
and sternmost zygian oarports by about 0.22 m.
  In practice the waves will not be regular; also the ship 
will probably roll, pitch and heave. And of course, oarsmen 
who  become   seasick   will  contribute   little   propulsive 
power.
  Tables 8.3 and 8.4 show that even in a wind for which 
W is only 4.5 m/s (8.7 knots) and V = 5.0 m/s (9.7 knots) 
affording, as shown in Table 8.1, very little thrust from the 
sails, the significant wave height of the fully-developed sea 
===== PAGE 88 =====
8. The Performance of Ancient Triremes in Wind and Waves 75
is 0.49 m and there will be a number of waves between this 
height and 0.87 m, the height of the “3-hour” wave.
  There is a further point. Oarsmen cannot give of their 
best if they are overheated. During the “sailing” season of 
antiquity the climate in the Black Sea was probably as hot 
as it is now. That means the ship would have to be well-
ventilated in order that the men’s sweat could cool them 
by evaporating. Otherwise it would drip off uselessly. A 
tailwind of only 1.6 m/s (3.1 knots) relative to the ship 
(true wind, 6.0 m/s (11.7 knots)) would scarcely be enough, 
but a stronger one would certainly make the sea too rough 
for fast rowing. In a calm, the ship would be ventilated by 
her own motion through the air at 4.4 m/s (8.5 knots).
  Commonsense suggests that assistance from the wind 
would have been accepted if it blew at a suitable velocity 
for a fairly short time, not long enough to raise hampering 
waves, and if on the quarter, not strongly enough to cause 
excessive  heel.  But  it  would  be  absurd  to  assume  that 
any  ancient  trierarch  or  kubernetes  would  have  set  out 
knowing that he needed to rely on such an unpredictable 
phenomenon. If the wind continued to blow, the oarsmen 
would  eventually  have  to  give  up  and  perhaps  the  ship 
would have to find shelter.
  I mentioned in the Introduction that quite apart from 
the  arguments  presented  here,  there  is  good  reason  to 
think  that  assistance  from  the  wind  was  unnecessary. 
This does not exclude the possibility of sail assistance in 
places where the fetch or duration of the wind were short 
enough to preclude the generation of hampering waves or 
where low speed was acceptable. But I regard it as certain 
that ancient Greek oarsmen making fast passages in their 
triremes between Byzantium and Heraclea did so under 
oar in smooth seas, or seas in the lower range of “slight” 
i.e.  waves  no  higher  than  0.3  m.  They  needed  no  help 
from the sails and they expected none.
  It appears from the Black Sea Pilot that at the present 
time there are days with suitably calm weather particularly 
during  the  spring  and  autumn.  The  prevailing   wind, 
however, is from the north-east, as was probably the case 
in antiquity.
  A trireme was unsafe in even moderately heavy weather. 
No wonder that larger ships with longer oars permitting 
higher  freeboard  and  higher  oarports  were  eventually 
developed, though at a cost in speed and agility under oar.
4. Conclusion
Given all the foregoing, it seems necessary to believe that 
when Xenophon said “under oar” that was precisely what 
he meant. The high cruising speed implied by his account 
is the reason why a wind gentle enough not to hamper 
the oarsmen by raising waves or heeling the ship would 
also  give  hardly  any  propulsion,  and  why  the  oarsmen 
would overheat. Stronger winds would be objectionable 
unless the wind blew for only a short time. While sail-
assistance  during  a  short-lived  blow  was  acceptable,  a 
good oarcrew in a fast ship neither needed nor expected 
it. In the Black Sea the fastest passages were made under 
oar in calm weather.
Acknowledgements
I  am  much  indebted  to  D.  J. T.  Carter  who  read  and 
commented on an earlier draft of this paper. Any errors, 
however, are entirely my responsibility.
Bibliography
The Black Sea Pilot. (Admiralty Sailing Directions)  London, 
HMSO.
Bondioli,   M.,  Burlet,   R.,  and  Zysberg,   A.  (1995)   Oar 
mechanics and oar power in medieval and later galleys. In 
Gardiner, R. and Morrison, J. S. (eds), Conway’s History of 
the Ship. The Age of the Galley. London, Conway Maritime 
Press, 172–205.
Burlet, R., Carriere, J., and Zysberg, A. (1986) Mais comment 
pouvait-on ramer sur les galères du Roi-Soleil? Histoire et 
Mesure I-314, 147–20.
Burlet, R. and Zysberg, A. (1986) Le travail de la rame sur le 
galères de France vers la fin du XVII siècle. Neptunia 164.
Carter, D. J. T . (1982) Prediction of the Wave Height and 
Period for a Constant Wind Velocity using the JONSWAP 
Results. Ocean Engineering 9, No. 1, 17–33.
Carter, D. J. T . (1996) Personal communications.
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988 .  Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea-Trials of 
Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Encyclopaedia Britannica, current edition (2009).
Frost, H. (1973) First season of excavation on the Punic wreck 
in Sicily. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 2.1, 
33–49.
Frost, H. (1974a) The Punic Wreck in Sicily. International 
Journal of Nautical Archaeology 3.1, 35–54.
Frost, H. (1974b) The third campaign of excavation on the 
Punic  ship,  Marsala,  Sicily.  The Mariners Mirror 60.3, 
265–6.
Greenhill, B.  and  Allington,  P . (1993)  ‘Sail-Assist  and  the 
Steamship.   In  Gardiner,  R.  and  Greenhill,   B.  (eds), 
Conway’s History of the Ship. The Advent of Steam. London, 
Conway Maritime Press, 146–55.
Morrison, J. S. and Coates, J. F . (1986) The Athenian Trireme. 
The History and Reconstruction of an Ancient Greek Warship. 
1st ed. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Pryor, J.  H.  (1995)  The  geographical  conditions  of  galley 
navigation  in  the  Mediterranean.  In  Gardiner,  R.  and 
Morrison, J. S. (eds), Conway’s History of the Ship, The Age 
of the Galley. London, Conway Maritime Press, 206–16.
Shaw, J. T . (1993a) Rowing in Ships and Boats. Transactions of 
the Royal Institution of Naval Architects 135B, 211–224.
Shaw,  J. T .  (ed.)  (1993b)  The Trireme Project .  Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Shaw, J. T . (1994)  The 1994 Trireme Trials 1994. Research 
Results and Discussion Watlington, The T rireme T rust.
See also chapters by Coates, by Morrison, and by Shaw in 
Gardiner, R. and Morrison, J. S. (eds) (1995) Conway’s 
History of the Ship, The Age of the Galley. London, Conway 
Maritime Press.
===== PAGE 89 =====
9.  Towards a Revised Design of a Greek T rireme  
of the Fourth Century BC: advantages of a long stroke
Summary
Experimental  data  from  the  sea  trials  of  Olympias  are 
put into a simple mathematical model. The length of the 
stroke available to the oarsmen in Olympias is too short 
to allow the ship to cruise at 7 to 8 knots under oar and 
at a sustainable rate of striking. The changes proposed in 
Ch. 12 of The Trireme Project would increase the available 
length  but  it  would  still  be  too  short.  A  satisfactory 
length could be obtained by adopting the further changes 
proposed in The 1994 Trireme Trials and in Plan 201–12, 
mainly the skewing of the rig by 18.4 degrees (the angle 
whose tangent in 1/3.)
1. Introduction
In my two papers above, I sought to show that Xenophon’s 
statement   that  a  trireme   could  make  Heraclea   from 
Byzantium in “a long day under oar” entails (a) a cruising 
speed of 7 to 8 knots and (b) that the passage could be 
made  with  no  help  from  the  wind.  As  this  could  not 
be  done  in  Olympias  various  changes  to  her  design  are 
needed. I think that it is generally agreed that the stroke 
available to oarsmen in the Olympias has been too short. 
A longer stroke would be available in the revised design 
(here called Mark IIa) described by John Coates in Ch. 
12 of The Trireme Project (Shaw 1993b, 71–4) but there 
are reasons for thinking an even longer stroke is required. 
A way of obtaining such a stroke without increasing the 
interscalmium  beyond  0.98  m,  namely  by  skewing  the 
oar-rig, was suggested by me in The 1994 Trireme Trials 
(a  slightly  edited  version  of  this  Report  is  reproduced 
above,  pp.  43–9) and  was  adopted  by  John  Coates  in 
his  plan  210–12  (see  the  preceding  paper,  Fig.  8.1).  I 
call this Mark IIb. An alternative, that of increasing the 
interscalmium by enough to eliminate the need for skewing 
the rig, is dismissed on the grounds that it would make 
the ship too weak structurally, and perhaps too long for 
the  ancient  slipways,  also  its  greater  wetted  hull  area 
would cause increased resistance. These points may need 
further attention.
Timothy Shaw
  In this note I begin by showing how far the distance 
advanced  by  the  ship  during  the  pull  is  increased  by 
rowing a longer stroke with the given oars. I consider the 
thranite oars of three ships: Olympias, and the hypothetical 
improved  designs  I  am  calling  Mark  IIa  and  Mark  IIb. 
In  order  to  reduce  the  number  of  tables  I  consider  for 
each  ship  only  those  thranite  (top  level)  oars  that  were 
9½ cubits long. The reader may work out the arithmetic 
for the zygian and thalamian oars and for the few in each 
level that were 9 cubits long.
2. Discussion
The first step is to list the dimensions of the oars both 
along their length and as seen in plan assuming them to 
be thranite oars inclined at 30 degrees to the horizontal. 
The  dimensions  in  plan  (i.e.  in  horizontal  projection) 
are shown in brackets. It will be recalled that the oars in 
Olympias were made in accordance with a cubit of 0.444 
m whereas those of the other two ships would conform to 
a cubit of 0.49 m. The inboard length of Olympias’ oars 
was not closely fixed: it was to a slight extent under the 
control of the rowers. Those who were allotted some new 
light oars made of spruce seemed to prefer to use about  
3 ft 7 ins to 3 ft 8 ins inboard, say 1,105 m. This dimension 
will be assumed correct for Olympias in what follows. It 
gives an outboard:inboard length ratio of 2.817.
  I assume that the outboard and inboard lengths of the 
9½  cubit  oars  in  Marks IIa   and  IIb  would  be  7  cubits 
and 2½ cubits exactly, giving an outboard:inboard ratio 
of 2.80. The ratio cannot be much less than this if the 
ships are to be fast. 2½ cubits of 0.49 m are equal to 4 ft 
0.2 ins. This length is convenient if the rig is skewed as 
in Mark IIb (Table 9.1).
  The widths and details of the shapes of the blades need 
not  be  specified  here  but  it  is  important  to  realise  that 
they must be such as will enable the blades to absorb the 
required  power.  This  may  entail  having  different  blade 
widths for the three different ships.
  Next, I list the lengths of the chords of the horizontal 
===== PAGE 90 =====
9. T owards a Revised Design of a Greek Trireme of the Fourth Century BC 77
projections of the arcs described by the butt-ends of the 
oars  during  the  pull  (i.e.  between  the  deadpoints)  and 
the  effective  length  of  the  pull  (i.e.  the  chord  between 
deadpoints minus the unavoidable end-losses), and I give 
the  angular  sweeps  the  latter  entail.  For  Olympias  and 
Mark IIa the total length of the pull between deadpoints 
is at most that of the interscalmium, respectively 0.89 m 
and 0.98 m., and this assumes that just before the catch 
the clearance between one man’s knuckles and the back 
of the next man aft is only 0.15 m (six inches). This may 
be impracticably tight but I don’t want to be accused of 
making  the  effective  stroke  in  Olympias  and  Mark IIa  
shorter  than  it  conceivably  could  be.  In  Mark IIb   the 
interscalmium is still 0.98 m but owing to the skewed rig 
the men can reach up to 1.1 m between deadpoints. This 
is limited by their physique, it being assumed that men 
who are only 1.68 m tall can reach this far if trained from 
boyhood  on  fixed  thwarts.  I  take  it  that  the  end  losses 
are the same in all cases and I assess them as 0.11 m. The 
effective  angular  sweep  is  twice  the  angle  whose  sine  is 
half the effective chord divided by the inboard length in 
plan. Thus we find the results tabulated in Table 9.2.
  The  last  line  emphasises   the  advantage   in  angular 
sweep gained by Mark IIb. I should add that the effective 
sweep  angle  given  for  Olympias  has  been  attained  only 
when  the  crew  were  making  an  exceptional  effort.  The 
gain in effective sweep angle that the increased effective 
chord  available  in  Mark IIa   might  be  expected  to  give 
(as compared with Olympias) is largely neutralised by the 
increased inboard length of the oars. I regard the swept 
angle of 65 degrees for Mark IIa implied on p. 72 of The 
Trireme Project as unattainable even though it includes the 
end  losses.  It  does  not  allow  enough  clearance  between 
oarhandles and men’s backs at the catch.
  The swept angle is very important as will be seen.
  Next, I need to explain how the instantaneous turning 
point of the oar (in relation to undisturbed water) shifts 
up and down the shaft during the pull.
  In (e.g.) Bourne (1925) and Sayer (1991) diagrams are 
given to show this shift for sliding-seat rowing but it is clear 
that the extent of it depends very much on the oarsman. 
It is not possible to quote one equation to cover all cases 
and so a more-or-less plausible selection must be made. 
I shall assume that in competent fixed-seat rowing, using 
oars carefully matched to the men’s capability and to the 
ship, the turning point at the effective catch and finish is 
at the neck of the blade (i.e. 0.55 m from the tip), that 
at mid stroke (considered geometrically not time-wise) it 
is twice as far as that from the tip, and that the variation 
in between is that of a sine curve. These distances, as seen 
in plan with the blade fully immersed making an angle of 
30 degrees to the horizontal, are 0.476m and 0.953 m.
  To create an expression for this movement I define:
d   as the distance in metres between the turning point and 
the tip (measured in plan)
A  as the angle of attack at the effective catch
B   as the effective swept angle
C   as the angle (somewhere between A and A + B) adopted 
by the oar at any given instant during the effective pull
The angles are in plan and in degrees. Then:
d = 0.953 sin [120(C – A)/B + 30 deg.]
Then where L is the outboard length of the oar in plan, 
we see that p the distance in plan between the thole and 
the instantaneous turning point is given by:
p = L – d.
This is made use of later.
  We already know B. It is now necessary to set values 
for A. As shown by video recording, the way people rowed 
in Olympias indicates that in her the stroke was roughly 
symmetrical  about  an  athwartships  line  enabling  me  to 
put, with little error, A = 180 – A – B. Since angle B is 
48.1 degrees this means that angle A is close to 66 degrees. 
John Coates did not intend this result; it arose because 
most of the rowers were too tall. He intended that much 
   
   
   
   
   
   
T able 9.1. Main dimensions of oars (those in brackets refer to the horizontal projection).
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
T able 9.2. Lengths and arcs of the pull.
===== PAGE 91 =====
Timothy Shaw78
more  of  the  stroke  should  have  been  cast  “in  front”  of 
the athwartships line. We intend to achieve this in Marks 
IIa and/or IIb. It is necessary here to discuss how far this 
should be taken.
  Where J is the inboard length of an oar in plan, V is the 
ship’s velocity, p and A have the meanings given above, and 
Q is the angle of skew of the seats and stretchers relative 
to the keel, then the velocity v of an oarsman’s shoulders 
required at the catch, relative to the ship, is given by:
v = J(V/p)sin A sin (A + Q)
The value of v is limited by the oarsman’s physical ability 
and the available time since the deadpoint. In turn this 
prescribes  the  best  angle  for  the  catch  (A),  given  the 
required  speed  of  the  ship  V,  the  valueof  Q  and  the 
dimensions of the oars.
  In order to obtain a reasonable value for v, I examine 
the case of the Oxford Etonian VIII of 1870, record-setters 
for fixed-seat rowing at Henley Royal Regatta, England. 
Their time for the course shows that their average speed 
V was 5.00 m/s (9.7 knots) if the adverse stream had its 
normal value of 0.17 m/s (0.33 knots). Their oars were 
12 ft long overall (3.66 m) and 3 ft 5 ins. long inboard 
(1.04 m). The blades were 3 ft 3ins long (0.991 m), i.e. 
the neck was 5 ft 4 inches (1.63 m) from the thole. The 
inclination  of  the  oars  to  the  horizontal  was  small  and 
it can be ignored. From a statement in Cook (1919), I 
assume the men’s length of stroke at the butt was 4 ft 0 
ins. (1.22 m). The swept angle between deadpoints was 
therefore 71.7 degrees. Data from Bourne (1925) that I 
collected in Shaw (1993ba) show a stroke length of 4 ft 
0 ins (1.22 m) but the inboard length is given as 3 ft 6 
ins. (1.07 m) and drawn (to a small scale) as 3 ft 7½ ins. 
(1.10 m). Accordingly the angular sweep is shown as 67 
degrees; the angle of attack at the catch (A) is shown as 43 
degrees. Making appropriate corrections and taking end 
losses into account we find that angle A for the Oxford 
Etonian crew may have been as little as 41 degrees, and this 
may have been partly responsible for their high speed.
  In an eight the skew angle Q is zero. I assume that in 
a record-setting crew the men rowed skilfully, immersing 
their blades fully but not overburying them: i.e. p at the 
catch = 5 ft 4 ins (1.63 m).
  The speed of a sliding-seat eight fluctuates considerably 
so that it would be quite unfair to assume the speed at 
the  catch  was  the  same  as  the  mean.  Edwards  (1963) 
gave a graph obtained from a slow-motion film and an 
accelerometer showing that the speed dipped sharply at 
the catch, so that when the blades were just covered it was 
only 17.0 fps (5.18 m/s (10 knots)) and it subsequently 
fell further to 15.5 fps (4.72 m/s (9.2 knots)) although 
the  average  speed  over  the  whole  pull  and  run  was  as 
much as 18.5 fps, (5.64 m/s (11 knots)). In a fixed-seat 
eight the dip would presumably be rather less as a smaller 
proportion  of  each  man’s  mass  would  be  in  accelerated 
motion relative to the boat at the catch. I shall assume the 
dip for the Oxford Etonian crew of 1870 amounted to 0.3 
m/s (0.58 knots) so that the speed V to be considered in 
the calculation below is not the target speed of 5.00 m/s 
(9.7 knots) in a 7 minute sprint but 4.70 m/s (9.1 knots). 
Better information on this point would be welcome. As 
for the triremes, their mass in relation to that of the men 
is so great that the dip can be ignored. (A man standing 
on the canopy of Olympias can, however, sense it though 
his feet.)
  Stating the distances in metres we find that:
v =  (JV/p)sin²  A  =  (1.04  x  4.70/1.63)sin²  41  =  1.29  m/s 
(2.5 knots).
This was the probable speed of movement of the Oxford 
Etonians’ shoulders at the catch if they obtained it correctly 
with  straight  arms  as  they  almost  certainly  did.  I  shall 
assume that a well-trained trireme crew could attain this 
shoulder speed for the catch, in a sprint lasting about 7 
minutes. (The Oxford Etonians’ record time in 1870 was 
7 min. 17 seconds.)
  One reason for the limitation of Olympias’ speed can 
now be seen. If the rowers’ shoulder speed v is not to exceed 
1.29 m/s (2.5 knots) and the angle A is about 66 degrees 
the  formula  given  restricts  Olympias’  speed  V  to  about 
7 knots (3.6 m/s) irrespective of the number of levels at 
work. This might be called her normal top speed. It has 
been demonstrated in rows of ¾ and 1 mile. As disclosed 
by the sea trials, however, any higher speed than this calls 
for exceptional efforts resulting in rapid exhaustion even 
though the mean effective power exerted may seem to be 
within the crew’s capacity.
  For Marks IIa and IIb  we may set V the top speed in 
a 7 minute sprint as 5.00 m/s (9.7 knots) (by equating 
power  available  to  power  required)  and  this  is  also  the 
speed at the catch as explained above. I shall assume that 
the men’s shoulder speed at the catch was 1.29 m/s (2.5 
knots).  Then  a  cruising  speed  of  3.86  m/s  (7.5  knots) 
entails a shoulder speed of 1.00 m/s (2 knots). In Olympias 
this would correspond to a speed of about 2.8 m/s or 5.4 
knots. Reference to the logs of Olympias shows that she 
could reach this speed when cruising.
  Now to calculate angle A for Marks IIa and IIb.
  For  Mark IIa   Q  is  about  zero  but  for  Mark IIb   as 
currently envisaged it is 18.4 degrees. We may tabulate 
the calculation for thranite oars (Table 9.3).
  These angles A apply to the zygians and thalamians also.
  Warning is given that these values of A are subject to 
some uncertainty. However, they are not likely to be far 
wrong. I can proceed to work out the values of p at all 
angles C and hence use the values of A and B to obtain 
the distances advanced by the ships during the pulls of 
different lengths.
  Remembering that d = 0.953 sin [120(C – A)/B + 30] 
and that:
p = L – d
I obtain various lengths and angles as shown in Table 9.4. 
  While  this  may  seem  a  long  way  round  to  a  simple 
answer the formula enables me to find p (i.e. L – d) at any 
permitted value of C and this is useful as will now be shown.
===== PAGE 92 =====
9. T owards a Revised Design of a Greek Trireme of the Fourth Century BC 79
  A sufficiently accurate value for the differential advance 
ds of the ship per differential angle dC of the angular sweep 
of the oar is given by:
ds = [(L – d).dC]/sin C
A  simple  computer  programme  sums  ds  between  the 
limits C = A and C = A + B and thereby reveals the total 
advance during the effective pull; if desired the advance at 
any intermediate angle can be obtained. Fig. 9.1 illustrates 
this. The step dC is given the value 0.01 degrees.
  Here I need to mention q, the distance between the 
instantaneous turning point and the centre of pressure.
  The mean value of the ratio p/(p + q), the mean ideal 
efficiency of the oars, is also tabulated. This is the efficiency 
that oars lacking inertia and hysteresis but having the given 
dimensions would exhibit if skilfully used. It is quite easily 
obtained by analytical methods (see Appendix). The results 
are shown in Table 9.5:
  The mean ideal efficiency is affected by, amongst other 
things, the number of oarsmen in action, n, and I need to 
discuss this here. The thrust per oar normal to the blade 
at the centre of pressure of the blade is equal to:
(a/b)P sin (C + Q) and to k(q/p)²V²sin² C
The first of these expressions is derived by considering the 
handle force P , assuming no friction losses at the thole; 
a/b is the reciprocal of the effective gearing. The second 
expression represents the resistance offered by the water 
to the blade.
  The second expression is of course an approximation. 
k is a coefficient of proportionality and q is the distance 
between the instantaneous turning point and the centre of 
pressure. For given k, V and angles C and Q the thrust per 
oar varies in inverse proportion to n. Hence q/p is inversely 
proportional to the square root of n and in particular, if 
n changes from 170 to 116, q/p increases by a factor of 
1.21.
  Since the mean ideal efficiency E is related to q/p by 
the expression:
1/E = 1 + q/p
it  follows  that  if  P ,  V  and  the  angles  are  kept  constant 
but three levels of oarsmen are reduced to two, the mean 
ideal efficiency of the oars of the Olympias, initially 0.756, 
becomes 0.719. This result is required later.
  If I am justified in assuming the check to hullspeed at 
the catch and the corresponding rise at the recovery can be 
neglected in a trireme, I can say with little error that when 
T able 9.3. T o find Angle A
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  

  
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
T able 9.4. Various lengths and angles
   
   
   
   
T able 9.5. The advance and the mean ideal efficiency
===== PAGE 93 =====
Timothy Shaw80
the ship’s speed is the same at the finish of one stroke as 
it is at the finish of the next one, the mean speed during 
the effective pull is the same as it is during the rest of the 
time, namely the run, including the entry and extraction 
of the blade.
  Then if I postulate a mean speed I can use the values 
of S tabulated above to specify the duration of the pull. I 
select three speeds, 7.5 knots, 3.86 m/s, about the speed at 
which a trireme would have to be rowed in order to reach 
Heraclea from Byzantium in “a long day”, 8.2 knots (4.22 
m/s) which Olympias has attained for very short periods, 
and  9.7  knots  (5.00  m/s)  which  should  be  attained  by 
Mark IIb if not by Mark IIa (Table 9.6).
  To proceed further I note from experiments carried out 
by and for The T rireme T rust that:
  the  mean  effective  power  W  watts  required  to  drive 
Olympias at speed V m/s with rudders partly raised to 
minimise their resistance is given by:
W = 155 V³ + 4.13 V5
and I postulate that the power required by Marks IIa and 
IIb would be 8% greater than this because of their greater 
length and displacement.
  In what follows I assume that during the trials about 
to be described the exceptionally-determined crew of the 
Olympias did attain the stroke length and angular sweep 
given in Table 9.2.
  It is the case that:
W = nPLrE/60
 where n =    number of rowers in action
        P =   a rower’s mean pull in newtons assumed to act 
at the butt
        L =   the effective length of the pull measured at the 
butt, in metres
        r =   the rate of striking in spm
        E =   the mean ideal efficiency.
To obtain the magnitude of a good rower’s mean pull I 
refer to a trial in which the 116 rowers in the two upper 
levels of Olympias sprinted for ¾ nautical mile. Their speed 
was 6.8 knots – 3.50 m/s – and the mean effective power 
required with rudders down and in a tailwind of 4 to 5 
knots absolute was calculated to be 12100 watts (Shaw 
1993b, 43). The rate of striking varied between 38 and 
39.5 spm. Taking the mean stroke rate as 38.75 spm and 
the  mean  ideal  efficiency  (calculated  above)  as  0.719,  I 
find that the mean pull P comes to:
  12100  ×  60/(116   ×  0.78  ×  38.75  ×  0.719)  =  288 
newtons
which is 64.7 1bf. I shall assume that young adult oarsmen 
in ancient Greece could pull this hard. This information 
relates to a sprint lasting about 6½ minutes. In order to 
apply it to other durations I shall assume that the mean pull 
varies directly as the rate of striking. (This is in accordance 
with oarsmen’s common experience.)
  This entails that Mean P = 7.43 r
  I now test these findings against the result of four short 
sprint trials of Olympias using all three levels of oars but in 
which (according to The T rireme Project, p. 43) probably only 
    
    
   
   
T able 9.6. Duration of the effective pull
Figure 9.1. Diagram to calculate the advance of the tholepin (i.e. of the ship) per differential angle of sweep of an oar knowing 
the position of the instantaneous turning point relative to undisturbed water. The diagram gives a plan view of the situation 
at some stage during the pull. ABCD is the line of advance of the tholepin. EBTF and GHCTJ are two successive positions 
of the oar, BC (called ds in the main text) being the differential advance of the tholepin, greatly exaggerated for clarity. T is 
the turning point. The angle BTC (called dC in the main text) represents the differential swept angle, greatly exaggerated. The 
distance BT is called p in the main text. The instantaneous angle of attack DCT is called C in the main text. As dC tends to 
zero, BH tends to p.dC, where dC is in radians, and so ds tends to p.dC/sin C, i.e. (L – d).dC/sin C (Drawing: J. T . Shaw).
===== PAGE 94 =====
9. T owards a Revised Design of a Greek Trireme of the Fourth Century BC 81
about 130 rowers were effective as most of the thalamians 
still  had  unsatisfactory   oars.  E  now  becomes   0.730.
  Given that the mean stroke rate overall was about 44.5 
spm the theory indicates that the effective power amounted 
to:
130 × 0.78 × 7.43 × 44.5² × 0.730/60 = 18152 watts.
With  rudders  partly  raised  and  negligible   breeze  this 
indicates a speed of 4.285 m/s or 8.32 knots. The mean 
speed sustained for about 45 seconds in each of the first 
three runs was 8.2 knots, and in the fourth run it was 8.3 
knots. Agreement between experiment and theory appears 
to be good and gives me confidence to continue.
  By the method just illustrated I now obtain the rates of 
striking and the mean pulls etc. required in Marks IIa and 
IIb for a cruising speed of 7.5 knots and a sprint speed 
of 9.7 knots as under. I assume n = 170, E = 0.780, P = 
7.43 r as already shown (Table 9.7).
  It should be recalled that the data for Mark IIa have been 
obtained on the assumption favourable to that design that 
clearance of as little as 0.15m between a man’s knuckles 
and the back of the man next aft, just before the catch, 
is adequate, on the one hand during cruising for hours 
on end, and on the other during a flat out sprint. Both 
propositions are doubtful and if they are not accepted the 
case for Mark IIb, already strong, is made stronger still. By 
permitting a longer stroke Mark IIb allows of a lower rate 
of striking, a lighter pull, and a more normal (for fixed-seat 
rowing) rhythm at both cruise and sprint conditions.
  The  last  remark  may  need  further  explanation.  It  is 
because the stroke in Mark IIa is shorter than in Mark IIb 
that Mark IIa requires not only higher rates of striking and 
stronger pulls but also higher rhythm factors. High rhythm 
factors feel artificial; they are resorted to in training in order 
to counter the tendency of unfit or inexperienced crews to 
go to the opposite extreme. In fixed-seat rowing the rhythm 
factors tend to be lower than on long slides (Bourne 1925). 
The Oxford Olympic VIII of 1960 exhibited rhythm factors 
in the region of 2.7 when rowing at about 35 spm even 
though they were on long slides (Edwards 1963). This puts 
the factors given above into perspective.
3. Conclusion
A case has been made for canting or skewing the rig in 
a  Mark  II  trireme  by  an  angle  whose  tangent  is  about 
1/3,  in  order  to  lengthen  the  available  stroke.  Such  a 
design of trireme can reasonably be expected to achieve 
a  performance   under  oar  consistent   with  Xenophon’s 
statement in the Anabasis (6.4.2); and if so, there would 
be implications for the design of other oared longships of 
classical antiquity.
Appendix: Calculation of the mean ideal 
efficiency of oars
The expression given in this paper for the variation of the 
position of the instantaneous turning point has the effect 
that the distance of that point from the tip varies as a sine, 
from sine 30 deg. to sin 90 deg. to sin 150 deg., i.e. as 
(some constant) times a variable that varies as a sine from 
0.5 to 1.0 and back to 0.5.
Bibliography
Bourne, G. C. (1925) A T extbook of Oarsmanship. Oxford, 
Oxford University Press.
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (eds) (1990) The 
Trireme Trials 1988. Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea Trials 
of Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Coates,  J.  F . (1994)  ‘The  Naval  Architecture  of  European 
Oared Ships’, Transactions of the Royal Institution of Naval 
Architects 136B, 175.
Edwards, H. R. A. (1963) The Way of a Man with a Blade . 
London, Routledge and Keegan Paul.
Sayer, Bill. (1991) Rowing and Sculling: the Complete Manual. 
London, Hale.
Shaw, J. T . (1993a) Rowing in Ships and Boats. Transactions 
of the Royal Institution of Naval Architects 136B, 211.
Shaw, J.  T . (ed.)  (1993b)  The Trireme Project .  Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.   Oxford,  Oxbow 
Books.
Shaw, J. T . (1994) The 1994 Trireme Trials. Research Results 
and Discussion (Watlington).
Sherwood, W . E. (1900) Oxford Rowing (Oxford).
  
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
T able 9.7. Rates of striking, etc, required at 7.5 knots and 9.7 knots.
===== PAGE 95 =====
10.  The Proposed Design of any Second 
Reconstruction
Introduction
In his three papers published in this volume (pp. 63–7, 
68–75, 76–81), Timothy Shaw has demonstrated by close 
argument with a sufficiency of physical evidence that:
i)  Xenophon’s  account  that  triremes  could  row  the  129 
sea miles from Byzantium to Heraclea in ‘a long day’ 
should be accepted as being true, provided that the sea 
was smooth or slight.
ii)  The  passage  was  made  under  oar  because  significant 
sail assistance at a ship speed of 7 knots or more would 
require  wind  speeds  high  enough  to  raise  waves  and 
swell too great for rowing or for triremes’ hulls to survive 
without structural damage.
iii)  Xenophon’s evidence therefore demands that a trireme 
with  a  moderately  good  oarcrew  could  maintain  7–8 
knots  for  many  hours  on  end  and  that  that  ability 
is  a  necessary   criterion   of  the  authenticity   of  any 
reconstruction.
iv)  Attainable  oar  power  depends  greatly  upon  length  of 
stroke.
v)   To enable a moderately good oarcrew to maintain 7–8 
knots in a trireme it must be possible for them to row 
with the longest physically practicable oar stroke.  
Of  these  five  conclusions,  iii)  provides  a  necessary  and 
important (but not sufficient) test of the authenticity of 
any reconstruction and v) indicates the main means by 
which that test may be passed.
  Thirty-odd   other  lessons   or  conclusions   from  the 
sea trials with Olympias have previously been published 
(Shaw 1993), and they are also listed in the Annex. All 
but a few remain valid and it is hard to imagine how they 
or the five conclusions above could have been learnt or 
deduced except from results of sea trials with an actual 
reconstruction built in all respects material to performance 
according  to  available  evidence  about  triremes.  It  has 
to  be  acknowledged  therefore  that  we  owe  our  present 
understanding  about  triremes  to  that  ship  and  to  the 
generosity  of  the  Greek  people  who  made  her  building 
and testing at sea possible. 
John Coates
  The aims of the trireme project and in testing any future 
reconstruction of a trireme (Shaw 1993) are:
i)  To achieve attested performance under oar.
ii)  To simulate and study manoeuvring and battle tactics 
by computer simulation of ship movements.
iii)  To explore the effects of being ‘heavy in the water.’
iv)  To study the kinematics and structural mechanisms of 
damage by ramming, and then apply Aim 2 to find the 
required tactics.
v)  T o study hauling triremes out of the water and launching 
them.
vi)  To establish sailing characteristics.
vii)  To  gather  more  experience  in  making  sea  passages  in 
oared ships.
viii) To continue investigation of hypozomata. 
The main proposed changes from the design  
of Olympias
T o pursue the above aims, the design will take into account 
the sixteen lessons from Olympias which call for changes. 
The main features of Olympias were vindicated by the sea 
trials and most of the changes would be better described 
as adjustments which, though they would not appear to 
be immediately obvious, would nevertheless be significant 
improvements. T wo changes however are more apparent 
but even so may not be obvious to many, except by direct 
comparison   with Olympias (Fig.  10.1).  Together  they 
would enable a large increase in oar power to be achieved, 
expected to be sufficient to pass the test of conclusion v) 
above and so justify a second reconstruction built otherwise 
on the same general lines as Olympias.
  The  first  main  change  in  the  design  of  any  second 
reconstruction  would  be  to  increase  the  spacing  of  the 
beams, clearly shown by trial to be needed for powerful 
rowing. Since 1989 and 1990 (that is, after Olympias was 
built)  that  increase  is  also  required  to  accord  with  new 
archaeological evidence about the length of the cubit used 
in 5th and 4th century BC building in Attica (Steinhauer 
===== PAGE 96 =====
10. The Proposed Design of any Second Reconstruction 83
1989; Dekoulakou-Sideris 1990). The new information 
makes it virtually certain that the cubit to which triremes 
would  have  been  built  was  about  0.49  metre  long,  not 
the 0.444 metre cubit, previously taken to have been the 
Attic cubit, and to which Olympias was built. Following 
Vitruvius (Dr Arch. 1.2.4), the two-cubit spacing of thole 
pins would therefore be increased from 0.888 m. to 0.980 
m. adding on that account 92 mm to the length of oar 
stroke.  It  would  in  turn  also  increase  the  length  of  the 
ship from 36.8 m to about 40 m (but see now Rankov, 
pp.  225–30).  That  greater  spacing  however  allows  the 
heads of thalamians to clear the beams by raising them 
(and the whole of the crew and structure above them) by 
an amount small enough not to reduce the ship’s stability 
unduly (Fig. 10.2). Freeing the thalamians, provided of 
course that they are not too tall, also frees the whole crew, 
which had to keep their oars in mesh with them, from 
the restricted length of stroke which had to be endured 
by  all  oarcrew  in  Olympias.  Thus  the  10%  increase  in 
beam  spacing  would  enable  a  worthwhile   increase  in 
stroke length to be obtained not only by the thalamians 
themselves but by the whole crew.
  The second of the bigger changes, whose great advantage 
could not have been realised without carrying out the first 
one, would be to set the whole oarcrew facing somewhat 
outboard, in other words skewed or canted, generally by 
about 18° from the true fore and aft direction, as discussed 
by Shaw (pp. 76–81) and drawn in Fig. 10.3. That skew 
is necessary to enable butts of oars to pass outboard of 
the rower next aft and so allow the stroke to be as long as 
Figure 10.1. General arrangement drawings of Olympias and of the proposed second reconstruction superimposed (Drawing: 
John Coates).
Figure 10.2. Position of ship beams relative to thalamians 
(Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 97 =====
John Coates84
is physically possible from a fixed seat at any of the three 
levels throughout the ship, given that the thalamians are 
released from restriction by the beams. The length designed 
for is a total stroke between dead points of 1.1 m at the 
butt, a gain for the whole oarcrew of at least 25% on the 
greatest possible stroke in Olympias, and for the thalamians 
the ability to be as effective as the others at all speeds. 
The proposed oarsystem
If the chords of the arcs swept out by the oar handles are 
in plan to remain perpendicular to edges of seats, skewing 
the seats to move stretchers outboard will necessarily swing 
the arcs swept out by the oars forward into the positions 
shown  in  Fig.  10.3,  where  the  arcs  lie  almost  entirely 
forward of athwartships. Oars working over such a large 
part of their time in the water so far from athwartships 
may seem to make them less effective in propelling the ship 
forward, but this is not so, as common rowing practice 
would suggest and Shaw’s theoretical analysis shows (Shaw 
1993b). There are also advantages. First, the speed of the 
oar handles needed to enter the water cleanly and to start 
effective strokes is smaller so that the effective stroke can 
start more quickly; second, there is a faster flow of water 
past the blade from the tip to the neck, mainly during 
the first part of the stroke, helping to reduce the extent 
of stalling and therefore the effectiveness of the blade in 
developing lift as well as reducing the amount of slip in 
the  water  (particularly  if  the  blades  are  relatively  wide 
and short as it is intended that they will be); third, fresh, 
stationary  water  will  be  pulled  by  the  blades  outboard 
into the oar race, reducing its increase in velocity towards 
the stern and thus helping to equalise the work done by 
oarcrew over the whole length of the oarsystem. It is not 
possible to put figures to these advantageous factors but 
they may be expected to compensate for any loss of forward 
thrust owing to the generally forward inclination of oars 
while in the water.
  The arcs of oars, shown in Fig. 10.3, have been placed 
to  minimize  interference  between  blades  in  the  water, 
particularly  at  the  finish,  and  any  crossing  of  shafts  in 
the plan view occurs too far inboard to be able to cause 
Figure 10.3. Arrangement of one triad amidships in the proposed second reconstruction (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 98 =====
10. The Proposed Design of any Second Reconstruction 85
collisions.  The  placing  of  tholes  and  oarports  has  not 
only  to  be  satisfactory  from  those  two  aspects  but  also 
to  accord  with  the  generally  accepted  interpretation  of 
the Lenormant relief and with a feasible arrangement of 
framing and beams within the ship. As will be mentioned, 
thranite  blades  have  been  separated  laterally  from  the 
others as far as possible at the finish. The need to avoid 
undue interference between oars hindering their extraction 
from the water, particularly by thalamians, was evident in 
rowing Olympias. 
 
i) Oars
It is proposed that oars at all three levels shall be of the same 
design and be identical to the experimental spruce oars 
which were tested in Olympias. In a future reconstruction 
they would be made to the longer cubit and the oar rig 
would be designed for the 9-cubit oars to be worked with 
a crude gearing (length outboard/length inboard) of 2.8. 
That the oars on all levels should be the same may not 
seem to respond to the evidence from the naval inscriptions 
of  the  inspector  who  somehow  distinguished  between 
thranite and zygian oars; the difference could have been 
in their identification marking. Even differences in wear 
patterns  from  use  may  yet  offer  an  explanation  of  this 
piece of evidence. In the meantime it seems sensible to 
use the best kind of oar which could have been adopted 
in triremes. 
  The proposed design of oar is shown in Fig. 10.4. It 
is as light as practicable if made of solid selected spruce 
and  the  diameters  of  the  shaft  are  determined  by  the 
need to limit deflection when pulled hard. The calculated 
deflection of the blade will be about 200 mm for a pull of 
45 kg. f. on the handle. The blade area, 0.078 m2, is the 
minimum at present judged to be effective, reducing oar 
mass without causing too much loss by slip in the water. 
Lightness of oars is most important in view of the high 
rates of striking in a fast fixed-seat ship, lightness being 
necessary to minimize mass inertia losses. There may be 
some advantage to be had from spooning the blades, in 
view  of  working  oars  so  far  forward  of  athwartships.  If 
they were spooned, they should be given squarer tips to 
gain  the  greatest  benefit.  On  blade  shape,  it  should  be 
noted that there is little guidance to be had from ancient 
ship representations which show a number of shapes on 
one-man oars whose blades may be interpreted as being 
attached to shafts. Monoxylous oars with narrow blades 
are associated in ship representations with polyremes in 
which the angular oar arcs are likely to have been smaller 
and the stroke deeper in the water. 
  The main object of skewing the seats is to enable butts 
to  pass  the  next  rower  aft,  but  that  cannot  be  simply 
achieved where the hull tapers in the bow, as will be clear 
from the plan view of the forward third of the oarsystem 
in Fig. 10.5. However, we know that of the 30 spare oars 
carried by triremes (IG 22 1606.43), three were short ones, 
9 cubits long, indicating (assuming an equal failure rate 
for long and short oars) that about 10% of the 170 oars 
in the oarsystem were also short. Aristotle and Michael 
of Ephesus refer to oars amidships being long (Aristotle 
On the parts of animals ,  687b.18;  Michael  of  Ephesus 
Commentaries on Aristotle ,  22.118.15)  and  Galen  states 
that all the oars extend an equal distance and likens them 
to the fingers of the hand where on one side there is the 
little finger (Galen On the Use of Parts of the Body 1.24). 
These references indicate that about 10% of oars were short 
(9 cubits long), that they nevertheless extended from the 
ship by the same distance as the long oars, and that they 
were at one end of the ship. In Fig. 10.5 short oars are 
shown in the bows where their short looms either enable 
the butts to pass the next rower aft even though that person 
is sitting further outboard, or the butts do not reach the 
next rower aft in sweeping out the same arcs as elsewhere 
in the system. This problem does not arise in the stern 
where 9-cubit oars can be worked. 
  If  the  short  oars  are  to  extend  by  the  same  distance 
Figure 10.4. Proposed oar (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 99 =====
John Coates86
from the ship as the long ones, their gearing is going to 
be indeed high. If that of the long oars is to be 2.8, then 
the gearing of the short oars will be 3.5, which is probably 
near to the maximum practicable. If that does prove to be 
too high, the blade areas of those oars could be reduced 
to compensate for their higher gearing. Alternatively, as 
the position of the oar at the thole is not definitely fixed 
by a button, it would be possible for short oars, as may 
be seen from Fig. 10.5, to be worked a few centimetres 
further inboard. 
ii) Tholes
The evidence as to whether oars in triremes were forward 
or aft of their tholes has been published before (Coates 
1993), and it is heavily if not conclusively in favour of the 
oars being forward of their tholes, as they invariably are in 
the Mediterranean today. The advantage of that position is 
that, in the event of ‘catching a crab’ or of losing control 
of the oar when stopping the forward motion of the ship 
by  holding  her  up,  the  oar  is  not  jammed  between  the 
internal  thole  and  the  after  edge  of  the  oarport,  which 
would  make  extraction  difficult  if  not  impossible.  The 
disadvantage is that whatever binding is used to hold the 
oar to the thole it must do so without stretching with use; 
if it does stretch valuable oar motion is lost, particularly to 
oars working through oarports. In Olympias we have had 
a lot of trouble from this cause: leather loops, seemingly 
attested in Homer, stretched far too much: rope grommets 
were better but still not satisfactory. In 1994, however, we 
rather belatedly learnt how Greek fishermen do it today. 
The essence of the method is to use a lanyard (it could be 
a leather strap better to accord with Homer) tied round 
oar and thole by a knot which does not slip and, equally 
important,  when  the  lanyard  has  stretched  after  use  it 
can be retied easily to make it tight again. It is proposed 
to use lanyards with this knot in future, and in view of 
the  importance  of  this  detail  to  the  oarsystem  and  its 
performance, how to tie this knot is described elsewhere 
in this volume (pp. 43–4 with Fig. 3.1). It is proposed 
that oars should continue to be forward of tholes.
  In Olympias oars were never feathered and we think on 
balance that they should not be in future. It is much more 
important that blades be kept vertical in the water which 
calls for a D-shaped section in the shaft at the thole; if the 
flat of the D is against the thole and the thole is vertical 
and the lanyard is holding the shaft close to the thole, the 
blade should never be far from the vertical. The carling or 
rail on which oars rest should be shaped so that the oar 
rubs on a ridge (sheathed with copper) in the same plane 
as the thole and sloping down from it so that at the catch 
oars  will  lie  with  their  blades  vertical.  In  that  way  the 
tendency of shafts to roll on the carling during the stroke 
will be reduced, together with wear. It will nevertheless be 
necessary (and the responsibility of every rower) to keep 
lanyards tight, and the oar carling or rail, and the thole, 
greased.
Figure 10.5. Plan view of the forward third of the proposed oarsystem (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 100 =====
10. The Proposed Design of any Second Reconstruction 87
iii) The stature of oarcrew
As experience in Olympias amply showed, the taller, long-
limbed rowers of the sliding-seat eights of today cannot 
work properly in a fixed-seat trireme. Before settling the 
exact  heights  of  seats,  beams  and  canopy  of  any  future 
reconstruction, it will be necessary to decide the limiting 
statures  of  each  of  the  three  levels  of  oarcrew  for  that 
reconstruction. Figs 10.2, 10.3 and 10.5 have been drawn 
for the following statures of oarcrew:
Level  Approximate stature  Principal limitation
Thranite  1.88 m. (6' 2")  Height of canopy 
Zygian  1.80 m. (5' 11")  Maximum  leg  length, 
seat to stretcher; beam 
spacing
Thalamian  1.75 m. (5' 9")  Height of beams and all 
structure  and  oarcrew 
above  them,  affecting 
ship   stability   and 
vertical  angles  of  oars 
in the top two levels
Raising the canopy to accommodate thranites taller than 
1.88 m would have relatively little effect on the ship. The 
stricter limitation on the leg length of zygians is imposed 
by  the  beam  spacing,  0.980  m.  The  sitting  height  of 
thalamians directly affects ship stability; a 1 cm. increase 
would raise the ship’s centre of gravity (G) by about 0.5 
cm. Olympias had a metacentric height (GM) of about 0.9 
m on trial with dry bilges, which may appear to be more 
than ample, but it was not enough to prevent small lateral 
movements  of  other  ship’s  crew  from  being  in  practice 
noticeable to the oarcrew. In any case, the presence of an 
otherwise  quite  tolerable  amount  of  bilge  water  would 
reduce effective GM by about 0.2 m (see pp. 182–4), and 
as also about a third of the mass of a trireme is oarcrew, 
able to roll on their seats in response to ship movement, 
they can raise the ship’s effective centre of gravity and so 
further reduce the effective GM by between 0.1 and 0.2 
m. By those causes the ship’s GM and hence stiffness in 
roll  could  and  at  times  probably  was  reduced  by  30% 
to 40% below the more theoretical GM of 0.9m. Most 
oarcrews of Olympias did not seem to think that she was 
by any means unduly stiff in roll. 
  In any second reconstruction, to enable the thalamians’ 
heads  to  clear  the  beams,   these  and  everything   and 
everybody above them, about half the whole mass of the 
ship  and  crew  taken  together,  would  have  to  be  raised 
by  about  15  cm,  which  would  raise  G  and  so  reduce 
GM by say 7 cm. Thus a second ship would have to be 
about 10% less stiff in roll than  Olympias, probably an 
acceptable price to be paid for freeing the thalamians from 
the beams and thereby increasing achievable power and 
speeds by the proposed oarsystem. Lateral movement by 
non-rowers would, however, in consequence have to be 
somewhat more firmly restricted. 
iv) Coping with waves
Having  their  tholes  only  0.45  m.  above  the  waterline, 
thalamians  will  be  in  difficulties  when  rowing  in  waves 
higher  than  about  0.7  m,  trough  to  crest  (though  in 
Olympias they did on occasion cope with such waves). The 
vertical  clearances  in  the  proposed  oarsystem,  however, 
allow more generous movements for rowing in waves than 
is the case in Olympias. Fig. 10.3 shows that blades can clear 
waves on otherwise level water of about a maximum height 
of about a metre, but in practice the maximum for the two 
upper levels and for any length of time is more likely to 
be about 0.8 m. The long strokes necessary for high power 
cannot be made in rough water, as every seaman who has 
rowed a seaboat knows, though in calmer conditions and 
when speed was needed longer strokes were used at sea, 
even though such a style with narrow blades would not be 
as efficient as it otherwise could be. Latter-day sea oars have 
for centuries been monoxylous and narrow bladed for good 
reasons, practical as regards use and strength in common 
conditions at sea and in harbours, as well as economic.  As 
waves get rougher, so stroke length has to be shortened and 
the blade moved more quickly down and up to be sure of 
making the stroke as effective as possible in lumpy water, 
and, most important, to be as sure as possible of being able to 
extract the blade on time. In such conditions narrow blades 
should actually be more efficient than wide blades because 
the water is flowing more across than along them, raising 
their aspect ratio. Further, in rough water the immersed 
area of the blade must be variable and that can be achieved 
with long narrow blades (McKee 1983). Shortening the 
stroke necessarily reduces attainable power and is a factor 
limiting  the  effectiveness  of  oars  in  rough  water,  a  no 
doubt  compelling  factor  in  determining  the  safety  of 
trireme deployments. It is interesting that in modern times 
wide blades took so long to be adopted in river rowing.
The hull
Olympias was built according to available archaeological 
evidence  on  ancient  Mediterranean   ship  construction 
and the hull has been indicated by trial to be sufficiently 
robust  to  have  a  service  life  generally  not  inconsistent 
with literary evidence. The lives of individual hulls almost 
certainly depended greatly upon the quality of build and 
the operational circumstances they encountered. This has 
always been true of wooden ships.
i) Hull planking tenons
Olympias however soon developed a hog (the ends of the 
hull  dropping  relative  to  the  middle).  Hog  has  been  a 
chronic tendency in wooden ships for millennia (Coates 
1985); in Olympias it was due not to any lack of strength 
but to the tenons joining the planks together (Fig. 10.6) 
working  in  their  mortices  in  the  fore-and-aft  direction 
allowing  adjacent  planks  to  slide  a  little.  In  long  and 
===== PAGE 101 =====
John Coates88
slender hulls, like those of triremes, hull bending moments 
and therefore shear forces are large (indeed they impose 
practical limits on the overall proportions of long ships of 
all kinds). Thus the principal purpose of planking tenons 
in ancient Mediterranean warships was to carry hull shear 
forces between planks, to do which without crushing called 
for  a  tight  fit  in  the  longitudinal  direction  (for  a  stress 
analysis,  see  Morrison  1996,  347–8).  In  Olympias,  the 
average longitudinal play in the tenons, measured while 
the hull was being built, corresponded closely to the 10 
cm or so hog which developed in service, measured over 
the length of the hull. 
  Obtaining a tight and simultaneous fit of the numerous 
tenons joining one plank to the one below calls for much 
accuracy and skill, and to help in that task it is proposed 
that  in  a  second  reconstruction  the  tenons  should  be 
tapered as shown in Fig. 10.6 (as has been found to have 
been done in many, but by no means all, ancient wrecks) 
and sized to an interference fit in the mortices as cut, so 
that, when a plank is driven down on to the one below to 
close the seam, a crush fit will be obtained. Interferences, 
tapers and cutting techniques will have to be decided by 
preliminary experimental development and testing before 
building is undertaken. This detail is discussed first among 
the changes to the hull because it lies at the heart of its 
soundness. In addition, it is proposed that the side planking 
between the lower and middle wales be thickened to 60 
mm (3 Athenian inches) in order that the tenons in the 
whole of the side planking can be made thicker than in 
Olympias,  to  increase  their  shear  carrying  capacity  with 
less risk of crushing the tenons and so developing hog in 
the hull. It is proposed in addition to build the hull with 
a small sag (the opposite of hog) because in practice some 
hog, say of 5 to 10 cm, is nevertheless bound to occur in 
time through unavoidable imperfections. 
ii) Dimensions and shape of hull
A new reconstruction would be just short of 40 m long 
overall to house 30 interscalmia of 0.980 m each, the bow 
and stern being the same as in Olympias (giving a length of 
36.8 m (as in Olympias) + 30 (0.980–0.888) m = 39.6 m). 
It is proposed to separate the tracks of thranite blades in 
the water as far as possible from the others by reducing the 
clearance between the ship and the pillars of the ancient 
Munychia shipsheds in Piraeus to 7 cm by increasing the 
breadth overall (i.e. over the outriggers) from 5.45 m to 
5.60 m while keeping the breadth on the waterline, the 
dominant determinant of stability, the same as in Olympias. 
The new hull would therefore have a slightly greater flare 
above water and the sides would be made a little flatter. 
It is proposed to reduce the depth of the bottom curve of 
the ‘wineglass’ section of the ship, reducing draft by about 
10 cm, which may increase leeway a little when the ship is 
sailing into the wind, but it would reduce hull wetted area 
and therefore the ship’s resistance through skin friction.
iii) Ship displacement 
The displacement of the ship may be expected, by these 
changes in dimensions and other adjustments to timber 
sizes in following the 10% larger cubit, to increase by less 
than 10%, and her resistance by slightly less proportionately. 
Many internal timbers could be reduced in scantlings by 
half an (Athenian) inch (which will be 10% larger than 
that to which Olympias was built). Timbers would again 
be  assumed  to  have  been  sized  in  Athenian  inches  and 
easy fractions of inches. Such timbers would be on average 
about 5% lighter (and no more numerous), offsetting the 
20% increase in planking mass (owing to a 10% increase 
in thickness and in length). Thus the shell would increase 
by 1 tonne, from 7 to 8 tonnes; framing, beams etc. would 
Figure 10.6. Hull planking tenons (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 102 =====
10. The Proposed Design of any Second Reconstruction 89
decrease by 1 tonne, from 6 to 5 tonnes; other timbers, 
decks and furniture would probably increase by about 1 
tonne. The net result would be an increase in light ship 
mass of about 2 tonnes, or 5%. Closer estimates will have 
to await detailed design calculations which would be part 
of the early programme of any reconstruction project.
iv) Ship resistance
Resistance  is  made  up  of  two  main  components,  skin 
friction  and  wavemaking.  The  first  depends  upon  the 
wetted  area  of  the  hull  and  its  smoothness,  and  varies 
approximately  with  the  square  of  the  ship’s  speed.  The 
second  depends  upon  the  length  of  the  ship,  upon  the 
slenderness of its hull form, and upon speed in a more 
complicated way. Displacement is not itself intrinsically 
connected with resistance, but it is necessarily connected 
with wetted area, length and slenderness which are. For 
a hull like that of Olympias, skin resistance is dominant 
at speeds up to about 6 knots, above which wavemaking 
resistance increases more rapidly, becoming about equal 
to  the  other  at  about  9  knots,  and  more  dominant  at 
speeds above that again. Speed-power curves for Olympias 
have been derived from tank tests of a model of the hull 
(Grekoussis  and  Loukakis  1985);  curves  of  resistance 
against speed have already been published (Shaw 1993c). 
The resistance of the proposed second reconstruction may 
be expected to be about 7% higher than that of Olympias 
at lower speeds, reflecting the net increase in wetted area, 
but only about 5% greater at sprint speeds owing to the 
beneficial effect of greater length upon wavemaking.
v) Attainable speeds under oar
Shaw (above p. 81, Table 9.7) has derived figures for mean 
handle pull, striking rate and effective stroke length, and 
effective oar power attainable by a moderately good crew 
working in the proposed oarsystem (called by him Mark 
IIb). Together with the expected power-speed curves for 
a proposed future reconstruction, these figures imply an 
attainable short sprint speed of 9.7 knots and a cruising 
speed sustainable for some hours of 7.5 knots. Shaw has 
shown that the achievement of such a performance under 
oar is a necessary test of authenticity of any reconstruction 
of a trireme. It is certainly a searching test, as his paper and 
the performance obtained in Olympias show, but it should 
be passed by the reconstruction proposed here. 10 knots 
is probably about as fast as any kind of craft today could 
be rowed from fixed seats: in 1870, the Oxford Etonian 
crew achieved a mean speed for about 7 minutes over the 
course at Henley of 9.7 knots in a fixed-seat eight.
vi) Sailing
The  performance  of  Olympias  has  not  yet  been  by  any 
means   fully   tested,   owing   largely   to  the  overriding 
importance felt to use the limited time for trials to gain 
as  much  information  as  possible  about  the  oarsystem, 
but  also  to  the  expectations  of  the  volunteer  oarcrews 
to  row  the  ship  rather  than  to  act  as  sailing  ballast,  to 
scarce opportunities, to some lack of confidence by those 
responsible for the ship, and to the omission of stopping 
in the planking seams above the lower wale, causing minor 
leakage when heeling to a wind. As Owain Roberts, sailing 
master in 1990, reported, ‘The results obtained in 1990 
must  represent  the  bottom  end  of  her  sailing  ability.’ 
(Roberts  1993,  37).  Within  those  limits,  however,  the 
rig and helm proved handy and responsive to changes in 
the wind. 
  It was nevertheless clear that Olympias’ sailing ability, 
if  not  yet  fully  tested,  was  potentially  considerable  and 
in accordance with such few records as exist of passages 
under sail by warships in the ancient Mediterranean and 
with  the  established  belief  that  oared  ships  by  choice 
made  passages  under  sail  whenever  conditions  allowed. 
That ability must have been an important factor in the 
deployment  of  squadrons  of  triremes  and  therefore  the 
exercise of sea power with them. In view of its operational 
importance, and despite the small attention yet given to 
it in the T rireme Project, for reasons already mentioned, 
sailing  ability  needs  to  be  properly  explored  with  any 
second  reconstruction  if  any  full  understanding  of  the 
naval use of triremes in history is to be gained.
  Some relatively minor changes in the masting and rig 
are proposed, as indicated by three of the lessons listed 
in the Annex, together with making the hull above the 
upright waterline and the askomata watertight. 
Investigations needed before building
i) T enons
The  exact  shape  of  tenons,  the  fit  in  the  mortices,  the 
method of marking and cutting, lubrication, and method 
of  assembling  plank  seams  need  to  be  developed,  and 
the  resulting  joints  tested  under  shear  loading  so  that 
building can proceed without unnecessary delays and with 
confidence about the stiffness of the hull in hog. 
ii) Oar rig
A full-scale mock-up should be built to test body and oar 
movements as well as clearances. It would be desirable that 
oars could be worked in water from the mock-up. 
iii) Hypozoma
The rig with dead eyes already proposed (Coates and Shaw 
1993),  and  the  method  of  tightening  and  maintaining 
tension should be developed.  
iv) Rudders
Tackles to raise and lower the rudders while the ship is 
underway should be developed.
===== PAGE 103 =====
John Coates90
Conclusion
This  outline  of  the  main  modifications  in  any  second 
reconstruction of a trireme is based on the lessons learnt 
from  Olympias, which  has  played  a  vital  part  in  the 
practical study of ancient Mediterranean oared warships. 
The  proposed  second  trireme  reconstruction   must  be 
considered to be yet subject to i) any further modifications 
which may be shown to be necessary in the course of the 
detailed design to define a second ship for building, and to 
ii) the possible adoption of materials other than wood in 
which to build the hull. This paper shows, however, that a 
proposed second reconstruction incorporating the features 
described can be expected with some confidence to achieve 
the level of performance of a trireme under oar and under 
sail required if it is to be considered authentic.
Annex: Summary of lessons learned from the 
sea trials in Olympias  
(reproduced from Coates and Morrison 1993)
1. Oarsystem
1.   Oars of equal length are workable together from three 
levels  simultaneously  and  after  only  a  relatively  short 
period of training.
2.   Damage to oar blades by clashing together was minor 
and avoidable.
3.   An interscalmium of two cubits of 0.444 m. (i.e. 0.888m.) 
is too short to enable maximum power to be reached.
4.   The position of the hull beams in Olympias caused the 
thalamians’ stroke to be too restricted for high-powered 
rowing. Given a longer interscalmium of 0.98 m, now 
thought to be correct, that restriction could be avoided 
in any further reconstruction.
5.   The oar gearing required in fast triremes is a high one, 
about 2.8 (i.e. the ratio of the length from the centre of 
pressure of the blade to the thole to that from the thole 
to the mid-handle).
6.   Oar straps of tanned leather stretched in use (oars being 
forward of their thole), causing too much lost motion 
in  oars,  particularly  those  working  through  oarports. 
If straps are to be of leather (as attested) they must be 
of  rawhide,  a  material  hard  and  unyielding  provided 
it  is  dry,  true  of  most  circumstances  in  ships  in  the 
Mediterranean  but  certainly  not  in  open  oared  craft 
in  northern  European  waters  where  oars  have  usually 
been worked aft of the thole (but see now above, pp. 
43–4).
7.   Sustained lubrication of oars and askomata is essential 
for higher powered rowing.
8.   An oar blade area of 0.08 m2 is sufficient, owing to the 
high gearing of the oars.
9.   Oars  must  be  as  light  as  they  can  be  made  without 
becoming too flexible if high powers and rates of striking 
are to be reached, irrespective of consequent fragility and 
risk of damage in battle.
10.  The longest attainable oarstroke is necessary to develop 
the maximum power.
11.  Maximum power is achieved at a striking rate of about 
45 strokes per minute.
12.  Modifications to the oar rig in Olympias that are needed 
to enable the required power to be reached in a sprint 
(raising  maximum  power  by  25–30%  and  speed  to 
9.5–9.7 knots) have been established clearly enough to 
make building and testing a modified ship a worthwhile 
experiment.
13.  The  same  modifications   are  expected   to  enable  the 
ship with a good oarcrew to maintain 7 knots all day 
continuously, as attested.
14.  If  going  astern  by  pulling  were  acceptable   practice, 
it  would  require  additional  footstretchers,  and  some 
modification  to  the  spatial  relationship  of  seats  and 
tholes might be called for. 
15.  Cushions on the seats of oarcrew are necessary for repeated 
sustained periods at the oar, not merely a comfort.
16.  Oarcrew must be protected from the sun.
17.  Ventilation for the lower oarcrew is barely adequate in 
Olympias.
18.  In  hot  weather  each  member  of  the  oarcrew  needs 
about one litre of water per hour while working hard. 
Dehydration is a real danger for oarcrew: the need, on 
the other hand, to urinate is minor.
2. Ship
1.   Oarports near the waterline of the ship when loaded with 
crew are safe if provided, as attested, with askomata to 
prevent entry of water.
2.   A hull constructed with the same arrangement of timbers 
and  broadly  similar  scantlings  as  were  found  in  the 
Marsala ship is satisfactory for a trireme.
3.   If  hogging  is  to  be  prevented  the  plank  tenons  must 
fit tightly in the longitudinal direction. This has been 
indicated to be a critical aspect of the construction of 
long ships built in the ancient Mediterranean manner.
4.   Side winds do not cause the ship to heel over enough 
to affect oar performance, except when also under sail.
5.   No undue vertical oscillations of the ship are developed 
under oar.
6.   The ship is easily steered and turned under both oar and 
sail, rudders being effective and light to handle.
7.   As  attested   by  Thucydides   (1.45–54),   no  ballast   is 
required for stability or to bring the ship to her correct 
waterline for rowing when fully loaded.
8.   The resistance or drag of the quarter rudders when fully 
immersed is high, strongly indicating that in antiquity 
it  would  have  been  the  practice  to  have  as  little  of 
blade  and  stock  immersed  as  expected  demands  for 
manoeuvrability allowed, rudders being readily adjusted 
to suit circumstances.
9.   Quarter rudders become uncontrollable in their normal 
position at astern speeds above about three knots. For 
use astern above that speed, they would have to be able 
to be reversed (but see now above, pp. 54–5).
10.  The  torsional  stiffness  of  the  open  hull  (undecked)  is 
adequate owing to the cross-bracing fitted between the 
hull  beams  which  are  also  clamped  by  lodging  knees 
(which   are  horizontal).   Without   such  bracing   the 
torsional stiffness would have been much lower, leading 
to resonance in torsion with oar strokes at higher rates 
of striking.
===== PAGE 104 =====
10. The Proposed Design of any Second Reconstruction 91
11.  The  height  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  Olympias  has 
been established by experiment, the only way to do so 
accurately. The metacentric height when fully manned 
is between 0.88 m and 1.1 m depending upon the load 
and disposition of variable and moveable weights.
3. Sail
1.   The ancient Mediterranean rig, of which there has been 
no practical knowledge in a long ship, has proved to be 
effective, handy and weatherly, enabling the ship to make 
way pointing 60° into the apparent wind with only 7° 
to 10° of leeway.
2.   The area of the main sail, 95 m2, could be increased a 
little by lengthening the main yard.
3.   Spars were unnecessarily heavy.
4.   The mainmast tabernacle is not secured to beams and 
floors strongly enough to give confidence of its safety 
in supporting an unstayed mast.
4. Navigation
1.   The main means of propulsion over long distances, as a 
usual practice, has been shown to have been by sail, oars 
being  used  generally  only  when  necessary  on  account 
of urgency, safety or the need to come into or clear the 
land.
2.   On passage, oars can usefully supplement sails (motor-
sailing, as it were) but only in light breezes astern or on 
the quarter, raising the speed under sail from about 4 
to 6 or more knots, without drawing on the physical 
reserves of the oarcrew to any significant extent. Such 
combined use of sail and oar has been found to be less 
useful in beam winds owing to interference in working 
oars due to heel of the ship. However, if the beam wind 
is steady, and not too severe, its heeling effect can be 
offset by stationing spare crew members on the windward 
side of the canopy.
3.   The capacity of an oared ship to reach shelter, to claw 
round a headland or to keep clear of a lee shore under 
oar and against head winds has been tested. This is a most 
important  factor  in  making  navigational  judgements 
and  in  keeping  in  mind  reserve  courses  of  action  on 
passage in this type of craft. Olympias has made good 3 
knots against a head wind gusting to 25 knots and in 
waves of up to one metre in height for 70 minutes. The 
oarcrew had by then become exhausted, a reminder of a 
state of affairs which, for thousands of years, captains of 
oared ships had to keep in mind constantly irrespective 
of whether their oarcrews were of free men, convicts or 
slaves.
4.   The wind resistance of the ship in a head wind has been 
found to be 1/30 of the water resistance of the hull at 
the same fluid speeds past the ship. In beam winds the 
ship drifted at 1/26 knot sideways per one knot of wind 
speed.
 
Bibliography
Coates,  J.  F . (1985)  Hogging  or  ‘breaking’  of  frame-built 
wooden ships. The Mariner’s Mirror 71.4, 437–442.
Coates, J. F . and Morrison, J. S. (1993) Summary of lessons 
learned. In Shaw 1993, 108–9.
Coates, J. F . and Shaw, J. T . (1993) Speculations on fitting 
hypozomata. In Shaw 1993, 82–6.
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Dekoulakou-Sideris,  I.  (1990)  A  metrological  relief  from 
Salamis. American Journal of Archaeology 94, 445–51.
Grekoussis, G. and Loukakis, T . (1985) Athenian T rireme: Calm 
Water T ests without Ram (National T echnical University of 
Athens Report No. NAL 06–F-1985). Athens, National 
T echnical University of Athens.
McKee, E. (1983) Working Boats of Britain, their Shape and 
Purpose. London, Conway Maritime Press.
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1996)  Greek and Roman Oared Warships  
(Oxbow Monograph 62). Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Roberts, O. T . P . (1993) The sailing rig of Olympias. In Shaw 
1993, 29–38.
Shaw, J.  T . (ed.)  (1993a)  The Trireme Project: Operational 
Experience 1987–90: Lessons Learnt (Oxbow Monograph 
31). Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Shaw, J. T . (1993b) Rowing in ships and boats. Transactions 
of the Royal Institution of Naval Architects, 1993.
Shaw, J. T . (1993c) The resistance/speed curve of Olympias, 
with a section on rudder resistance by Ian McCallum. In 
Shaw 1993, 45–7.
Steinhauer,   G.  (1989)   Communication   in  Hellenike 
Archaeologike Hetaireia, 20 April 1989. 
===== PAGE 105 =====

===== PAGE 106 =====
Part 3
Critiques of Olympias: For and Against
===== PAGE 107 =====
11.  As Seen by a Passer-by
I  got  to  know  John  Coates  by  a  round-about  route,  as 
it were, after the Olympias trials had been concluded. It 
was over a question of water consumption. The Olympias 
rowers drank as much water as those in the 18th-century 
galleys and the sugar-cane harvesters of the 20th century. 
Moreover, it seems more than likely that their Athenian 
predecessors drank a similar amount, and that the question 
of water supply on triremes arose at an early stage. This 
reflects  an  essential  fact:  that  the  ‘human  engine’  has 
remained the same over the centuries. The water question 
led to a long correspondence with John, and we later rowed 
together on an astonishing series of craft.
  I thus stand outside the Olympias project – my preferred 
galleys being those of Venice in the 15th century, or the 
Royal galleys of the 17th or 18th centuries. These periods 
are  of  interest  because  they  have  left  behind  valuable 
written evidence for the functioning of the human engine. 
The Olympias trireme has had several factors in its favour 
which have not, in my opinion, been sufficiently recognised 
hitherto, and this I shall now attempt to put right. As in 
every undertaking, there were also negative factors which 
should  not  be  ignored. To  an  observer  like  myself,  this 
project has been based on a realistic hypothesis, which all 
those previously attempted have not. The hypothesis has 
been probed and tested, which is probably the strongest 
possible argument in its favour. In spite of a number of 
unavoidable problems, the thing has worked. We are well 
aware  that  some  trireme  reconstructions,  even  though 
they  were  produced  by  talented  engineers,  have  turned 
out  to  be  fiascos.  The  fact  that  Olympias is  workable  is 
indisputable, and thus a number of aspects of the design 
have been verified.
  The  hull  was  constructed  ‘shell  first’  with  mortise-
and-tenon  joints,  as  in  antiquity.  This  is  familiar  to  the 
‘archaeologist-diver’   but  has  never,  to  the  best  of  my 
knowledge, been applied in the 20th century in a hull of 
this size. This allowed the construction of a hull with a low 
displacement, a feature well-suited to propulsion by oars.
  Professor John Morrison wisely consulted a professional 
René Burlet (translated by H. K. Boller)
naval   architect   about   the  hull,   and  its  lightness   in 
conjunction with the form designed by John Coates has 
resulted in a very manoeuvrable vessel, a feature essential 
in a ship armed with a ram. It is certain, however, that 
the Athenians did not possess John Coates’ knowledge of 
hydrodynamics, and from this point of view Olympias may 
well be a ‘super-trireme.’
  The  system  of  lateral  rudders  has  proved  effective, 
although it was already known to function reasonably well 
because it is still in use in Indonesia today. It was, however, 
interesting to discover that with only one such rudder in 
the water, there was a speed gain in Olympias of 9%.
  Another very strong point in the project’s favour is the 
discovery of the need for ‘cooling’ of the rowers, which is 
vital for a group of men working under difficult conditions. 
I have no idea whether the ancient Greek authors make 
reference to it, but if they did not this may imply that 
solutions had already been found in antiquity.
  The  problem  of  stroke  rate  and  how  to  maintain  it 
is  another  important  question  which  appears  to  have 
been resolved in the course of the trials. The problem is 
completely different in the galleys known to me, since their 
longitudinal curvature allowed the oarsman at the end of 
each oar to see his counterpart on the sternmost bench 
who set the pace, allowing a sort of visually-maintained 
togetherness.   In  fact,  as  it  would  appear,  rowers  can 
successfully follow the stroke using a variety of movement 
indicators (knocking of oars on thole pins, grinding noises, 
etc.). The fact that the trireme was noisy as a result of the 
clashing of oars is not surprising. The inability of galleys 
rowed ‘alla zenzile’ (i.e. three men / three oars per bench) 
to proceed quietly was one of the well-known drawbacks 
of  the  system.  The  consumption  of  oars  was  amazing 
– Venice ordered them by the thousand.
  One of the most interesting questions raised was that of 
the work done by the thalamians. Their effectiveness was 
in doubt at speeds above 6 knots, something which, with 
hindsight, could perhaps have been foreseen, but no one 
had hitherto seen a thalamian in action and it was all a 
===== PAGE 108 =====
11. As Seen by a Passer-by 95
matter of conjecture. I am not here going to dwell on the 
fact that the thalamians were badly positioned (John is still 
convinced that I think he is a torturer). To ask someone 
to row with a clearance of 70–75 cm between two beams 
remains in my view the biggest problem in the positioning 
of the rowers, and the change to a slightly longer cubit 
will not significantly affect this.
  People cannot work comfortably except within limits 
within which they judge themselves to be safe – which was 
not the case in Olympias given the risk of collision with 
a beam both in front and behind. Thalamians will row 
normally as long as they are sure that they will not injure 
themselves. This point needs to be stressed. The existing 
conditions  led  to  astonishing  body  movements,  shown 
perfectly in the stroke diagrams: compensatory movements 
are clearly visible. The rowers wanted to work but were 
prevented by the beams, and so they did something else, 
making disjointed movements in a vertical plane, which 
was  the  only  one  in  which  they  could  operate  without 
risk. Generally speaking, the design of  Olympias took a 
very optimistic view of the capacity of the human engine 
and the movements it was capable of sustaining.
  Apart from this problem, and in spite of it, we now 
know how a trireme works and how it manoeuvres, and 
we have credible performance figures to prove it. The fact 
that  Olympias was  able  to  move  and  manoeuvre  under 
both oar and sail with a relatively untrained crew remains 
in my view the most tangible proof of the success of the 
operation.
  The real problem confronting Olympias is of a different 
nature – it is a conceptual one. As I mentioned above, on 
the one hand the originators of the Olympias took a very 
optimistic view of the human engine and its capabilities, 
whilst on the other they appear to have had little knowledge 
of  what  happened  on  later  galleys  and  how  the  comites 
and skippers actually managed their oarsmen. Let us not 
forget that often, and for long periods, the rowers under 
their command were free men: at the battle of Lepanto 
in 1571, the majority of the Venetian galleys were ‘free.’
  The human engine is not very reliable, and produces 
very little power, which decreases rapidly with the period of 
exertion. When Napoleon first decided to invade England, 
there was great deal of rowing activity at Boulogne. Forfait, 
a naval engineer of note, has left us definitive writings on 
the  subject,  based  on  rowing  exercises  in  a  wide  range 
of boats. In summary, his findings are as follows: that a 
well-operated galley can manage one hour at four knots, 
and then two to two-and-a half hours at two to two-and-
a-half knots, after which the crew blows up unless it has 
a rest. Under these conditions, incidentally, Dover would 
still have been a long way off.
  The  Comite   Réal  Masse  (the  younger),   who  was 
commander   of  a  French   flagship   and   well   placed 
professionally  to  know  what  to  expect  from  a  crew  of 
oarsmen,  says  exactly  the  same  at  the  beginning  of  the 
18th century. Moreover, it is not so much speed which 
concerns us here. Olympias, with her low displacement, 
can  easily  reach  7  knots,  and  no  doubt  more  on  short 
runs, but it seems illusory to believe her to be capable of 
sustaining this for hours on end. Besides, little purpose 
would have been served by her doing so. In practice, a 
trireme,  a  galley,  a  felucca  or  a  brigantine,  all  of  them 
equipped with fixed rowing systems, would have travelled 
under sail as often as possible. This is the paradox of this 
type of oared vessel, which sails as often as it can because 
those in command are perfectly aware of the capabilities 
of  the  human  engine  whose  power  must  be  conserved. 
Let me add that Olympias, with a good set of sails, would 
surely travel faster than 7 knots.
  Many of the trials staff of Olympias had been competitive 
rowers or had coached others in the sport. They were used 
to rowing the equivalent of a 100-metre sprint, whilst the 
Olympias rowers  had  to  run  a  Marathon,  and  these  are 
different types of event. 
  On this point, the ancient sources are quite explicit. In 
the course of an historic passage under oar from Athens 
to Lesbos (184 sea miles), one trireme gained 24 hours on 
another which had left earlier. In the eyes of the Athenians, 
this  was  a  great  feat,  and  it  will  always  remain  so.  The 
stakes were enormous and the second trireme had to be 
the best available: a lightened ship with a hand-picked, 
highly-motivated crew, conscious of their mission. Despite 
this, the average speed attained did not exceed 6 knots, if 
that. John Coates has a schedule which I have adapted to 
fit a number of different scenarios, and it has proved to 
be very revealing. The objective of this feat was ambitious 
but realistic – at the extreme limit of what trireme rowers 
could achieve under difficult conditions.
  The second voyage for which we have an explicit reference 
was a ‘normal’ trip of 129 sea miles between Byzantium 
and Heraclea, which could be completed under oar in a 
single day. Presented in this way, it dwarfs the achievement 
of the Lesbos rowers. A ten-hour day would have meant 
an average speed of 12.9 knots, double the speed of what 
was considered a ‘special feat.’ Special conditions must be 
assumed to explain this away – rowing on the day of the 
summer solstice (what about other days?), or using oars 
lighter than those of Olympias (why not carbon-fibre oars?). 
All of this detracts from the realism governing the design 
of  Olympias:  the  facts  are  there  and  must  be  respected. 
But  the  argument  is  largely  irrelevant:  any  captain,  be 
he  Athenian,  Venetian,  Provençal  or  Catalan,  who  was 
making this trip under normal conditions would surely 
have made it under sail, or more precisely rowing under 
sail.  An  average  of  ten  knots  then  becomes  possible,  as 
was proved by much heavier galleys later on.
  Rowing under sail is an exclusive speciality of this type 
of vessel: when the wind drops a little the rowers join in, 
when it becomes stronger they stop. Passage is achieved 
with astonishing ease, and without tiring the oarsmen who 
can carry on in this manner for hours on end – there is 
plenty of evidence for this. It seems almost inconceivable 
that people who had rowed for centuries would not have 
discovered this trick.
===== PAGE 109 =====
René Burlet96
  With a speed of 7 knots on short trips, Olympias is an 
oar-propelled vessel worthy of note. It is a quite exceptional 
ship, but when powered solely by oars its average speed 
over long distances will be a great deal lower, as was that 
of all galleys. This was why the latter made use of sail.
  This forced economy of the human engine remains the 
paradox of this kind of vessel down through the centuries. 
The  time  spent  propelled  solely  by  oars  never  exceeded 
10–15% of the total time at sea. All ships which have used 
human muscle to propel them into battle offer analogies 
which  have  hitherto   not  been  taken  sufficiently   into 
account: the common factor is the human engine. Over a 
thousand years, from Athens to Venice to Barcelona, this 
factor changed very little: the trireme is not an unusual 
vessel, but one of a great line of combat ships.
  However, as far as I am concerned, Olympias will always 
be  an  indisputable   success,  because  her  creators  have 
broken new ground and because their ‘floating hypothesis’ 
has worked. We have learnt a great deal on our way through 
a field of scholarship which has hitherto belonged strictly 
to  the  literary  sphere.  In  view  of  the  problems  which 
are inherent in this type of undertaking, could we have 
expected any more? 
===== PAGE 110 =====
12.  Comments on Olympias
Definition of the Author’s Role
I have been asked to read the literature and to comment 
as an independent naval architect. This role is appropriate 
as when I first saw the mock-up at the Boat Show I was 
sceptical of the possibilities of the oar system rig because 
of the angle of the upper oar and the likelihood of clashing 
of  the  whole  set.  This  attitude  has  slowly  changed  as  I 
learned more about the basis of the design. At that time 
I knew none of the people directly concerned with the 
scheme and made the acquaintance of the designer, John 
Coates, as a result of my interest in the evolution of this 
detective story.
  Eventually I became satisfied with every aspect of the 
design except the spacing of the deck beams in relationship 
to the thalamians’ heads, which has emerged as the only 
major  problem  in  the  scheme  and  was  largely  brought 
about by an error in the value of the appropriate cubit 
(Morrison  1941)  –  I  shall  discuss  this  later  in  further 
detail.
Criticism
Rather than attempt a further resumé of the substantial 
body of Olympias literature, I have set down my reactions 
to  the  individual  criticisms  that  have  been  made  and 
concluded  with  my  own  opinion  on  the  project  as  a 
whole.
Oar system
This  is  of  course,  the  key  to  the  design.  The  designer’s 
problem is to design a vessel propelled by oars and sail 
that can, under oars alone, maintain the speed of seven 
knots  defined  in  the  literature,  over  a  full  day,  with  a 
higher sprint speed for battle assessed by the design team 
as 9–10 knots.
  It  appears  virtually  certain,  from  the  evidence  from 
literature,  inscriptions  and  representations  of  triremes, 
that the oarsmen were arranged in groups of three, one 
on each of three levels, and that they were 170 in total.
  The speed of 10 knots is very high for a rowing boat 
(similar to that of a modern racing four) and requires full 
efficiency from each oarsman at a rate of striking in excess 
of 40 strokes/minute.
  As the length of the oars is defined in an ancient naval 
inscription, the arrangement with an outrigger as proposed 
in 1941 by John Morrison (1941) appears logical in that it 
enables each oarsman to apply full work to the oar at the 
necessary gearing of about 3 to 1 required for this speed, 
provided that:
a)  the angle of the upper oar was not excessive;
b)  that oar clashing did not occur;
c)  that all oarsmen could apply full work at 40/45 strokes/
minute with complete confidence.
In the event the trials have fully answered (a) and (b) in 
that the thranites were able to give their full power (just), 
and from the start, the crews very swiftly learnt to row 
without clashing. (c) produced the only real problem in 
that  the  restriction  of  the  beams  with  the  consequent 
shortness of stroke reduced the output of the thalamians 
in particular to such an extent that at the higher speeds 
their contribution was very low. Nevertheless, despite a 
number of crabs caught, there were no casualties!
  With the increase of the cubit from 0.444m to 0.49m 
the distance between the beams will increase by 10% to 
0.98m, which is sufficient to increase the length of stroke 
to one metre and to allay the fears of the thalamians head-
banging. These two factors should allow them to increase 
their output sufficiently to raise the sprint speed over five 
minutes from about 8.5 knots to 9.5 knots.
  The  reason  for  the  low  level  of  the  thalamians  is  to 
keep down the centre of gravity and thus maintain the 
stability of the slim hull. It would have been possible to 
raise the main beam over the heads of the thalamians, but 
this in turn would have raised the centre of gravity of the 
remaining oarsmen, which at the time of design was seen 
as  a  risk.  Subsequent  inclining  tests  on  the  actual  hull 
Edwin Gifford
===== PAGE 111 =====
Edwin Gifford98
have shown a sufficient margin in stability to enable the 
vertical clearance to be increased, which will give further 
space for the oarsmen to work without anxiety and hence 
with full efficiency.
  Another possibility would have been to omit alternate 
main beams to give the thalamians greater head space, but 
this would have reduced the torsional stiffness of the craft, 
which has been shown by trials to be just sufficient.
  Although both stiffness and stability are now shown to 
be adequate and with hindsight could perhaps have been 
slightly  reduced,  the  designer  could  not  have  taken  the 
risk of doing so with such a unique design.
  Two  other  oar  arrangements   have  been  proposed, 
but  neither  has  been  supported  by  worked-up  schemes 
illustrating  the  oar  paths.  Both  have  the  objection  that 
some of the oarsmen are obstructed which would inhibit 
both the length of stroke and the oarsmen’s confidence, 
precisely  the  kind  of  faults  that  the  thalamians  had  in 
Olympias. But whereas the simple increase in the spacing of 
the oarsmen will surely overcome the Olympias problem, it 
would seem, until proved otherwise, that these objections 
are fundamental to the other schemes.
Hull dimensions
The hull cross-sections and lines seem ideal for the length 
and width of the slipway described in the literature. They 
are the best compromise between speed and stability with 
deck crew and when under sail. This has been proved by 
the tank test and the behaviour of the craft itself.
  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  hull  could  have  been 
built for a shorter life and so be lighter and more flexible. 
Analysis of the hull stresses shows that it is on the limit 
for wave bending, and although the Athenians might have 
taken more risks than present regulations would permit, 
it is not clear that the small reduction of weight would 
have  had  any  great  effect,  particularly  as  the  sustained 
and sprint speeds can almost certainly be achieved by the 
increase in length of the “room”.
  In fact, despite being built to resist the forces induced 
by ramming, Olympias is quite light at a ship weight of 
25 tons for 170 oars or 147 kg/oar. An approximate check 
on the Sutton Hoo ship gives eight tons for the maximum 
of 40 oars that she could carry or 200 kg/oar, which is 
considerably heavier, and Sutton Hoo was lightly built of 
25 mm planking. The difference is, of course, due to the 
high density of oarsmen given by the trireme arrangement, 
but there is little scope for a lighter build that would hold 
together in a seaway, resist ramming and not be seriously 
leaky.
  It has been suggested that longitudinal flexibility could 
be controlled by the hypozoma, but this is not the case. 
Whilst the truss can exert a force that, when first applied, 
might “set up” the hull after deflection, the high stretch 
of  the  linen  rope  means  that  this  force  would  be  soon 
lost and thus not be available to resist repeated hogging 
at  sea.  Indeed,  the  function  of  the  hypozoma  is  not  yet 
fully understood and is still a subject of great interest for 
further  research.  But  it  would  certainly  not  stiffen  the 
boat torsionally, which would be needed if the hull had 
greater flexibility. Such torsional slackness could be a severe 
handicap to the oarsmen as it could result in the bow and 
stern  oarsmen  on  opposite  sides  being  simultaneously 
unable to clear their oars from the water on the recovery. 
The writer has experienced an old clinker racing eight in 
which it was possible for bow and stroke to catch crabs 
simultaneously  and  be  unable  to  clear  them  because  of 
the temporary twist of the slack hull. Imagine that in a 
trireme!
Oar weight and dimensions
My first reaction to the revised oar design was to doubt 
whether such sophistication existed in antiquity, but as it 
has been shown that such a lightweight and special shape 
is necessary for the high rate of striking needed for 9–10 
knots, the possibility of such a design must be considered 
seriously. There is no doubt that the ancients had great skill 
in wedged trenails, as well as pegged mortice-and-tenon 
joints, so the attachment of blades to the shaft by such 
means is practical.
Hull construction methods and materials
It would of course be ideal to have used the same timbers 
and tools employed by the ancients, but the former are 
not available in sufficient sizes and quality, and cost would 
prevent the extensive use of hand tools.
  The project team have used timber of equivalent weight 
and  strength  and  have  given  the  relative  values.  Their 
building method approximates to those of the ancients, 
except for the moulds used to obtain the shape needed, as 
the technique of forming the hull by shaping the blanks 
has been lost in the Mediterranean. It still exists in India 
and has been revived in Roskilde, but it is not vital for 
the purpose of this project. It could perhaps be used on 
another smaller scheme in the future.
My conclusion
Archaeologists more used to basing their studies mainly if 
not exclusively on discovered physical remains have been 
understandably somewhat sceptical of the authenticity of 
Olympias because no remains of a trireme have yet been 
discovered, probably because being unballasted they could 
not sink, and thus become preserved, when abandoned.
  Identifiable  remains  of  ancient  Mediterranean  oared 
ships have so far been limited to:
a)  The Punic ship found by Honor Frost near Marsala in 
the early 1970s (Frost 1973; 1974a; 1974b).
b)  The Athlit ram (Steffy 1983).
c)  The ships in Lake Nemi.
(a) is not a warship for which purpose it had an insufficient 
number   of  levels   of  oars.  She  sank  because   she  was 
===== PAGE 112 =====
12. Comments on Olympias 99
ballasted,  supporting  the  notion  that  she  was  a  cargo 
carrying ship. It did however reveal how long ships were 
built in the ancient Mediterranean, essential information 
for reconstructing a trireme.
  (b) is a ram and little else apart from the important 
timber structure inside the casting. The timber exhibited 
the  same  kind  of  construction   as  the  Marsala   ship, 
strengthening  the  belief  that  a  trireme  hull  would  have 
been built in the same way.
  (c) are of grotesquely widened ships built on this lake as 
floating pleasure palaces and gardens. They show the same 
method of construction, but could not be taken as reliable 
guides for the construction of oared ships in general until 
corroborated by (a) and (b).
  However,  despite  this  paucity  of  remains,  which  is 
the total specifically for triremes, when the accumulated 
archaeological,  epigraphical,  literary  and  iconographical 
evidence is assembled, and a ship designed to accord with 
it, including a severe requirement for a sustained speed of 
7 to 7½ knots for about 18 hours continuously, it can be 
seen by any one familiar with ship design that technically 
there was little, if any free choice in the essentials of the 
design of a trireme if it was to be stable, strong and very 
fast indeed, when fully manned and if its long and very 
slender open hull was to be strong.
  I  appreciate   that   it  would   be  difficult   for  those 
unfamiliar with ship design to realise how close are these 
restraints  and  how  consequently  they  permit  only  one 
solution (albeit with the possibility of variation in minor 
details) and thus increase the likelihood of authenticity.
  After a long study of the extensive literature (which I 
recommend to some of the critics) I cannot see how the 
design of Olympias could be improved as a solution to the 
parameters of beam, length, number and length of oars 
and speeds that have been set, except for the matter of 
the revised cubit that was demonstrated by carrying out 
sea trials and referred back to the historians.
  There  can  be  no  serious  doubt  that  this  project  has 
added enormously to our knowledge of ships of that period, 
particularly in the organisation and practice of rowing and 
in operating large, fast oared ships. It is hard to see how 
that knowledge could have been gained in any other way 
and the high standard of prompt reporting of the carefully 
conducted sea trials of this ship has made that knowledge 
available to all, adding greatly to the overall value of the 
project.
Bibliography
Frost, H. (1973) First season of excavation on the Punic wreck 
in Sicily. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 2.1, 
33–49.
Frost, H.  (1974a)  The  Punic wreck  in  Sicily. International 
Journal of Nautical Archaeology 3.1, 35–54.
Frost, H. (1974b) The third campaign of excavation on the 
Punic  ship,  Marsala,  Sicily. The Mariner’s Mirror 60.3, 
265–266.
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1941)  The  Greek T rireme. The Mariner’s 
Mirror 27.1, 14–44.
Morrison, J. S. (1991) Ancient Greek measures of length in 
nautical contexts. Antiquity 65, 298–305.
Steffy, J. R. (1983) The Athlit Ram, a preliminary investigation 
of its structure, with additional notes by Patrice Pomey, 
L.  Basch  and  Honor  Frost. The Mariner’s Mirror 69.3, 
229–250.
===== PAGE 113 =====
13.  Comments on Olympias
Seán McGrail
When compared with other projects in experimental boat 
archaeology, the T rireme project is in a class of its own in 
terms of its rigorous search for authenticity, its openness 
to criticism, and its publication record. One significant 
difference from some other projects is that documented 
aspects   of  5th/4th   century   BC  trireme   performance 
were included in Olympias’ design specification, whereas 
elsewhere performance has to be established during trials. 
However,  discussion  at  the  Oxford/Henley  conference 
seems to have shown that the documentary evidence for 
trireme passage speeds of c. 7.5 knots is not as convincing 
as  was  once  thought  (see  pp.  145–60):  the  high  sprint 
speed  of  9  knots  that  this  implied  need  therefore  no 
longer  be  considered  as  a  ‘historical  requirement.’  The 
impressive  speeds  under  oars  that  Olympias did  achieve 
strongly  suggest  that  she  is  close  to  attaining  passage 
speeds  derived  from  a  more  realistic  interpretation  of 
documented voyages.
  Everyone, even the strongest critic, has benefited from 
the T rireme Project. We have all needed Olympias as a focus 
for our criticism, with the happy result that alterations to 
the Mk I design can now be proposed which would make it 
more likely that a Mk II Olympias would represent a typical 
5th  century  BC  Athenian  trireme.  If  key  modifications 
suggested  in  these  discussions   (Morrison,  Coates  and 
Rankov 2000, 245–246, 267–273; above pp. 76–91) were 
to be incorporated, the shape, structure, and performance 
of the resulting vessel would probably be as near that of a 
typical 5th/4th century BC trireme as it is possible to get 
with the incomplete information at present available.
Bibliography
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F . and Rankov N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  Cambridge 
University Press.
===== PAGE 114 =====
14.  The Reconstructed T rireme Olympias  
and Her Critics
Anthony J. Papalas
The trireme, the premier fighting galley of the fifth century 
BC, is a significant technological achievement of the ancient 
Greeks. One of these triremes has been reconstructed in 
our own era. John Morrison, Classical scholar and former 
President of Wolfson College, Cambridge, John Coates, a 
naval architect retired from the Ministry of Defence, and 
Frank  Welsh,  a  writer  and  banker,  pooled  their  talents 
for the purpose of its creation. Their reconstruction was 
based to some extent on the ideas Morrison proposed in 
an  important  study  published  in  the  Mariner’s Mirror 
in  1941.  His  views  were  considerably  influenced  by  an 
interpretation of the Lenormant relief, a marble plaque 
52 cm wide and 39 cm high preserved in the Acropolis 
Museum that shows a trireme in realistic detail (Morrison 
1941, 27–31). He argues (p. 28) that the artist did not 
bother to sculpt images of some of the oars between the 
wales  because  this  was  indicated  by  paint.  (see  further 
Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 138–150).
  The   reconstructed   trireme,   the   Olympias ,  was 
commissioned   in  July  1987  into  the  Hellenic   Navy 
as  a  training  ship.  The  multi-level  oared  vessel  proved 
satisfactory in four sea trials, in 1987, 1988, 1990 and 
1992 (Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990; For the history of the 
reconstruction, see the delightful and instructive account 
of Welsh 1988.). According to a shore-based geodimeter, 
the Olympias achieved a speed of 8 knots at a rate of 45 
strokes per minute. The oars were almost of equal length 
and were manipulated simultaneously from three different 
heights.  Oarsmen  rowing  only  on  one  side  achieved  a 
turning diameter of 1.9 lengths, performing a 360-degree 
turn in 128 seconds (Morrison 1988). While the speed and 
manoeuvrability of the Olympias was generally in line with 
fifth-century   performance  capabilities,   some  questions 
remain unsolved and a certain degree of scepticism remains 
about the accuracy of the reconstruction. In this paper, I 
hope to place some of these questions in perspective.
  In the course of the sea trials much was learned. The 
builders were able to solve the problem of securing the 
oars  by  copying  the  method  of  Greek  fishermen  who 
hold the oar to the thole with a lanyard of leather or rope 
tied with a particular knot. But a more serious problem 
related to the oarsmen was not adequately addressed. The 
thranites, the oarsmen at the top level, and the zygites, 
who sat on the thwart, were relatively comfortable, but 
the thalamians, the men at the lowest level, were cramped 
even though their maximum height was limited to 5 feet 9 
inches (Rankov 1994, 137–8). The Olympias’ thalamians 
barely squeezed into their position and would not have 
fitted into the lowest level of a Greek trireme. 
  The recruiters for the Olympias’ oarsmen could not find 
enough  short,  strong  people.  The  Greeks,  on  the  other 
hand, had a good supply of men under 5 feet 6 inches, 
the  average  height  of  the  ancient  Greeks  (Angel  1971, 
85). The trireme provided small men, who were too short 
for  hoplite  service  (Hanson  1989,  66;  1991,  81  n.  4.), 
an opportunity to contribute important military service. 
The  hoplite  carried  a  shield  about  three  feet  long,  bore 
about 50 pounds of body armour, and wielded an eight-
foot doubled spear. A short man, however strong, could 
not effectively manage such arms, nor could he hold his 
shield high enough to protect the man on his left, who 
in phalanx formation partially relied on his neighbour’s 
shield for safety. This may well explain the deployment 
of the seventy Athenian triremes at Sphacteria in 425 BC 
(Thucydides 4.32.2). The oarsmen from the first two levels 
disembarked  to  fight  the  Spartans,  but  the  thalamians, 
about 3,700 men, were kept aboard. Basch (1988, 187) 
and Morrison and Williams (1968, 269) reasonably suggest 
that the thalamians were kept out of the final attack on 
the Spartans because either the Athenians needed to keep 
some oarsmen in the ship or they had no weapons, or were 
disqualified because they were slaves. They probably did 
not have military equipment because they were too short 
to take a place in the phalanx formation but this would 
not exclude them from peltast service. 
  Thucydides (4.28.4) reports that the Athenians recruited 
for  this  expedition  peltasts  from  Aenus,  a  city  on  the 
coast of Thrace. This type of light-armed soldier carrying 
===== PAGE 115 =====
Anthony J. Papalas102
a crescent-shaped wicker or leather pelta, hence the name 
peltast, originated in northern Greece. Since these men did 
not have to fight in hoplite formation presumably height 
qualifications for them was not necessary and thalamians 
may have qualified for peltast duty. But as we have seen 
Thucydides  (4.32.2)  is  quite  clear  that  the  thalamians 
remained aboard. Although triremes were often used as 
troop  transports  the  Sphactereia  campaign  is  a  special 
case. Cleon promised to settle the matter in twenty days 
and thus speed was necessary. (Thucydides 4.28.4.) The 
trireme was a good sailing vessel as trials of the Olympias 
has  proven.  The  Athenians  relying  mainly  on  sails  left 
Piraeus  for  Sphacteria  with  the  decks  of  their  triremes 
packed with hoplites, peltasts and archers and with some 
additional  hoplites  pulling  oars  at  the  first  two  levels. 
Such a crew would have been ineffective in a naval battle 
but  since  the  Athenians  did  not  anticipate  confronting 
a Peloponnesian navy the quality and experience of the 
oarsmen  was  not  an  issue.  What  made  this  expedition 
especially  unusual  was  the  marine  landing  aspect.  The 
oarsmen at the first two levels had to leap off their triremes 
and establish a beachhead. The peltasts, who probably were 
on the decks, joined them while the thalamians stayed on 
board controlling their vessel. 
  The  thalamians   were  presumably   the  most  radical 
element  in  Aristotle’s  (Politics 1291  b  21–25)  ‘trireme 
democracy.’ Aristophanes (Knights 541 ff.) notes the ladder 
of  promotion  from  oarsman,  assistant  at  the  steering 
oar,  lookout,  and  finally  steersman.  A  short  thalamian 
would  probably   not  be  tall  enough   for  these  choice 
assignments. The thranites had greater physical abilities, 
more  responsibilities,  and  therefore  enjoyed  higher  pay 
(Thucydides 6.31.3). The inferiority of the thalamians is 
implied in Herodotus 8.118–119, and the humble status 
of this lowest level makes Aristophanes’ (Frogs 1074–1076) 
joke  about  them  comprehensible.  In  the  Olympias,  the 
thalamians were ineffectual at speeds greater than six knots. 
(Rankov 1994, 135).
  The cramped space for the oarsmen at the thalamian 
level may partially explain why the Olympias, apparently, 
does not have the range of the ancient trireme. According 
to  Xenophon  (Anabasis  6.4.2)  a  trireme  had  the  ability 
to cover the distance between Byzantium and Heraclea, 
129 nautical miles, in a long day. If we assume a “long 
day” consisted of fifteen hours and that the voyage was 
undertaken   mainly  by  oar  rather  than  sail,  then  the 
Olympias,  as  an  oar  driven  vessel,  was  inferior   to  its 
ancient  counterpart.  Shaw  (1993b,  43)  reports  that  in 
Olympias a speed of 8.5 knots was maintained for about 
20 seconds, and that full pressure was sustained for only 
90  seconds  because  rowers  at  this  rate  going  beyond  a 
minute become fatigued and accident-prone. He argues 
(1993d,  64)  that  an  Athenian  crew  could  maintain  10 
knots for about a minute and (p. 58) cruise for hours at 
7  knots.  Shaw  was  particularly  concerned  (1993b,  41) 
about the minimal power contribution of the thalamians, 
and explained (1993d, 62) that 40 of the 54 thalamians 
could not row effectively, restricted by fear of hitting their 
heads on a beam, or getting caught in a crab. They also 
had inadequate oar blades, and many of the thalamians 
were  moreover  women  not  robust  enough  for  the  task. 
Rankov (1994, 131–132) discusses some of the difficulties 
in  the  first  trial.  The  keleustes was  unable  to  herald  his 
commands throughout the ship. Inexperienced oarsmen 
with  ineffective  rowing  strokes  were  another  concern. 
Rankov (1994, 144) contends that contemporary oarsmen 
cannot be compared with their Athenian counterparts. An 
ancient Greek had skill and stamina for the job acquired 
at an early age. Manipulating an oar in a limited patch 
of water is a talent comparable to shooting a basketball 
through a hoop, a dexterity acquired in boyhood. He notes 
(1994, 136) a speed in Olympias of 8.9 knots for a few 
seconds and that with modifications 10 knots would be 
possible. Papalas (1997, 268 n.14) was, however, wrong in 
stating that Morrison and Coates in The Athenian Trireme 
suggested that 11 knots could be maintained for any length 
of time, though Morrison in a letter to the London Times, 
2nd October, 1975, thought a trireme using full oars could 
produce eleven and a half knots in short bursts, and with 
one  tier  rowing  could  maintain  seven  and  a  half  knots 
for  a  long  period.  Morrison  thus  believed  that  the  120 
(actually 129) nautical miles Xenophon (Anabasis 6.4.2) 
claimed a trireme covered in a long day was a 15-hour 
voyage  during  which  the  trireme  averaged  seven  and  a 
half knots. (Tilley 1997, 12 mistakenly claims Morrison 
stated that a trireme could maintain a speed of 12 knots 
to cover this distance). 
  Although the Greeks did not like to voyage at night, 
it would be possible to set out several hours before dawn 
from a known point in halcyon conditions. We need not, 
therefore,  take  Xenophon’s  ‘long  day’  from  Byzantium 
to  Heraclea  literally  (see  Thucydides  1.48  and  possibly 
8.99 for such night-time voyages). The direct route from 
Byzantium to Heraclea was necessitated by the hostility of 
the Bithynians and Thracians who denied port facilities, 
and this was the usual way for a trireme to cover this route 
and  probably  not,  as  Morrison  (1993,  16)  suggests,  an 
unusual performance. Shaw (above, pp. 63–7) supports 
Morrison’s estimate of seven to eight knots cruising speed, 
and concludes that a good crew could achieve the voyage 
in eighteen hours while a moderately good one could do 
it  in  sixteen.  He  also  (above,  pp.  68–75)  dismisses  the 
possibility  of  Xenophon’s  Bosporus  to  Heraclea  voyage 
being assisted by sail. 
  The  most  serious  problem  in  limiting  the  cruising 
capacity of the Olympias was the result of packing all the 
oarsmen,  not  just  the  thalamians,  too  closely  together, 
and not providing them with ample room to make a full 
stroke with their oars. The situation is comparable to a 
golfer  losing  distance  by  taking  only  a  half  swing.  The 
mistake  was  a result of Coates  utilising  the  Attic  cubit 
of Niessen (1892) of 0.444 metre for an interscalmium, 
the distance between two tholes or a room. This length 
proved too narrow. New information demonstrates that 
===== PAGE 116 =====
14. The Reconstructed Trireme Olympias and Her Critics 103
the Greeks built the trireme using a cubit of 0.490 metre. 
The additional space between the thole pins would add 92 
mm to the length of an oar stroke (Morrison 1991; Coates, 
above p. 83). A trireme built to the longer cubit would be 
40 metres long rather than the 36.8, but Basch (1987b, 
94) appropriately points out that the preserved length of 
the Zea ship sheds, 37 metres long, does not determine 
the maximum length of the trireme. The additional room 
would provide the oarsmen with room to take a full stroke. 
With such a modification a trireme could produce bursts 
of speed up to 9.7 knots, and possibly an adequate cruising 
speed to cover the Byzantium-Heraclea route in one long 
day (Shaw, above pp. 62–81; Coates, above pp. 82–91). 
  The  chief  aim  of  the  trials   was  to  determine   the 
Olympias’ performance under oars. Further tests will no 
doubt  provide  information  about  such  matters  as  her 
battle worthiness, rough sea range, out of water hauling 
and launching, sailing abilities, long distance capabilities, 
and  the  rigging  of  the  hypozomata, ropes  forming  the 
under girdle of a trireme. Coates and Shaw (1993, 85–86) 
report that the tension tourniquet produced by following 
Apollonius  of  Rhodes’  description  of  the  launching  of 
Argo, ‘to girdle the ship strong with a well-twisted rope 
from within,’ did not work on the Olympias. The authors 
recommend  that  hypozomata consisting  of  polymer  be 
fitted with deadeyes and a double whip. One would also 
hope  that  further  investigations  will  be  made  into  the 
diekplous,  the  manoeuvre  that  enabled  the  trireme  to 
obtain the optimum ramming angle. How effective was 
the ram in inflicting structural damage on a rival trireme? 
How did triremes disengage after ramming? Was it done 
by pulling – the oarsmen having turned to face what had 
been  the  bow  (Tilley  1992a)  –  or  by  remaining  in  the 
same position and pushing? Shaw (1993e) notes that while 
the Olympias was not fitted with the requisite additional 
foot stretchers, the oarsmen were able to row astern by 
pulling. Furthermore, we do not yet know how effective 
and durable the trireme was. The Olympias, which made 
a 90-degree turn in seconds, and a 180-degree turn inside 
two ship lengths within a minute, would not be a ‘sitting 
duck’ in a trireme duel. Shaw (1993g, 99) draws the useful 
analogy of duels between the triremes and aerial dog fights 
of World War I and II. Expert helmsmen, like ace pilots, 
were  needed  to  elude  and  trick  the  enemy.  According 
to Thucydides (2.87), Phormio told his men before the 
second  engagement  off  Naupactus  ‘one  cannot  ram  an 
enemy ship if one does not get the enemy in sight from 
a considerable distance.’ We must assume that the officer 
in command made his strategic decision when the enemy 
fleet was first sighted, and then kept his ships in motion 
with a leisurely stroke rate increased at a critical moment. 
If the crew maintained a high stroke rate for a minute or 
more before the ramming manoeuvre, it would have been 
too  fatigued  to  continue  operations.  Shaw  (1993d,  64) 
argues that an Athenian crew could maintain 10 knots for 
about a minute. At impact, however, the attacking ship 
needed only three to four knots; (John Haywood in Shaw 
1993g, 100). Shaw (1993g, 101) cites Herodotus 1.166.2 
to argue that rams were occasionally wrenched off, but in 
this passage Herodotus refers to pentecontors; we do not 
have one reference of rams wrenching off triremes during 
battle. 
  As  more  information  is  accumulated,   many  of  the 
above questions will surely be answered even if controversy 
can never be fully excluded. Consider, for example, the 
present successful performance of the Olympias. Despite 
it  scholars  and  seamen  continue  to  disagree  about  the 
nature  of  the  trireme   and  the  fundamental   accuracy 
of  the  reconstruction.  But  one  of  our  aims  should  be 
the  reduction  of  controversy  through  the  provision  of 
more accurate analysis. Hence, this study will review the 
discussion to date and conclude that the Olympias is indeed 
a reasonable representation of the ancient trireme.
  Let us first consider the opinions of Lucien Basch, an 
astute student of the iconographic evidence, who believes 
that  the  Olympias reconstruction   does  not  accurately 
reflect the pictorial data. He is particularly critical of the 
oar  system  of  the  Olympias, which  is  based  on  oars  of 
approximately the same size. He argues that the ancient 
trireme was propelled by oarsmen with oars of different 
lengths,  and  diagrams  this  type  of  oar  system  with  the 
thalamians  working  from  a  rather  high  oar  port.  Basch 
(1987b,   94–99)  suggests   that  the  dimensions   of  the 
oars  of  the  thalamians,   zygites  and  thranites   are  not 
mentioned  in  the  Athenian  naval  inventories   because 
they were differentiated in appearance. Basch made these 
observations  shortly  before  Olympias’  first  sea  trial  (see 
also Basch 1988), but Coates and Morrison (1993, 132) 
note that inscriptions of the fourth century BC (IG 22 
1604.43–44 and 1605.14) confirm that oars were of similar 
lengths. Coates (above pp. 82–91) also finds the results 
provided by the equal length of oars for the oarsmen at 
three  levels  in  the  Olympias perfectly  acceptable,  while 
Tilley  (1997,  4)  finds  Basch  inconsistent  in  his  use  of 
iconographic evidence.
  Basch also sees less uniformity in the design of triremes 
than  the  designers  of  Olympias do.  Before  the  battle  of 
Artemision, Herodotus (7.194) notes a Persian squadron 
mistakenly   took  Greek  triremes   for  Persian,   and  so 
Morrison, Coates and Rankov (2000, 156) suggest that 
the differences between the Greek and Persian ships ‘was 
not  such  as  would  be  obvious  under  such  conditions.’ 
Basch (1979, 318–19) misinterprets Morrison’s remarks 
to mean that the triremes from the respective fleets were 
‘identical’, and argues that it is not uncommon to fail to 
distinguish  vessels  at  sea.  Basch  emphasizes  diversity  in 
design:  ‘At  the  risk  of  giving  offense,  I  ask  under  what 
authority is it permissible to assert with certainty that the 
triereis of Ionia, including the 353 triereis at the Battle of 
Lade  were,  shall  we  say,  of  the  Lenormant  relief  type?’ 
Torr (1894, 100) also noted the necessity of displaying 
national flags on ships to distinguish them from the enemy, 
although in his article ‘Navis’ in Daremberg and Saglio 
(1904, 214) he saw a consistency in the design of ships 
===== PAGE 117 =====
Anthony J. Papalas104
among  the  Etrsucans,  Greeks  and  Phoenicians  evolving 
simultaneously. 
  Basch (1988, 165–71) detects in a mutilated marble 
plaque, the Eleusis relief of c. 350 BC, a more technologically 
advanced trireme than the one depicted on the Lenormant 
relief, and equates it to vessels depicted on fourth-century 
BC  coins  (cf.  Morrison  1996,  187).  He  maintains  that 
by  the  fourth   century   BC,  ships  with  a  parexeiresia , 
an  outrigger, supported  by  exterior  struts  were  being 
replaced by those which did not have external supports, 
and cites the Eleusis trireme and the trireme depicted on 
the  L ’Aquila  relief  as  examples.  Basch  (1988,  176)  also 
maintains that the Lenormant relief, which depicts struts 
supporting an outrigger, is an inaccurate Roman copy. He 
argues that if the L ’Aquila relief had been found on the 
Acropolis the Olympias would have looked much different. 
According to Basch, the trireme went through a number 
of major changes in antiquity, evolving into the sort of 
vessel depicted in the funerary relief of Cartilius Poplicola 
at Ostia, a ship driven by oars coming out on the same 
vertical line from a giant oar box or outrigger. T riremes in 
the 5th century BC tended to be similar but that is not 
to  say  that  a  trireme  that  saw  service  at  Salamis  would 
closely resemble one in the Roman navy. After Actium, 
the  Romans  went  many  centuries  without  a  major  sea 
battle, and deployed their fleet as a deterrent (Starr 1941, 
7).  This  fact  doubtless  had  something  to  do  with  the 
type of trireme that evolved in the Roman Empire. The 
Romans used the vessel as an escort or a means to show 
the flag. Perhaps the giant outrigger in Poplicola’s trireme 
added  speed  but  rendered  the  ship  less  combat-worthy 
because it would have been a convenient ramming target 
for an enemy ship (for the vulnerability of outriggers, see 
Morrison 1993, 15). Morrison (1996, 267), contrary to 
Basch’s criticism, is not unaware of the changes in the role 
and  construction  of  the  trireme.  Throughout  the  work 
of Basch, there is the implication that the creators of the 
Olympias could have built a more authentic trireme if they 
had meticulously assessed more of the evidence. In addition 
to Basch’s views on the length of the oars (1979, 290–7), 
he has reservations about the length of the hull (1990), 
the thickness of the tenons fixed at 12 mm, and the use 
of polysulphide sealant to assure the water-tightness of the 
hull (1987b, 105).
  Scepticism is here carried too far. Although Basch argues 
persuasively about the evolution of the trireme, he forgets 
that the design of the Olympias was based on fifth century 
BC  models.  Basch  suggests  that  Morrison  and  Coates 
relied too much on the Lenormant relief. They, in fact, 
gained much knowledge from the Talos vase, a late fifth 
century  work  of  art  that  gives  a  detailed  picture  of  the 
stern of a trireme. They argue that the triremes depicted 
on both these works of art complement each other and 
provide  special  insights.  The  former  depicts  a  warship 
afloat and the latter renders a galley resting on a beach. 
Each has thalamian oar ports, and a projecting outrigger, 
which  suggests  a  three-level  oar  system. Taken  together 
these triremes support the present reconstruction of the 
Olympias. Basch’s proposed trireme with high thalamian 
oar  ports,  oars  of  different  lengths,  awkwardly  placed 
zygian oarsmen, and a heavy hull, seems to be nautically 
unsound (Coates and Morrison 1993, 136–137; Morrison, 
Coates and Rankov 2000, 146–150).
  A. F . Tilley, a retired naval officer, questions whether 
the Olympias has any resemblance to an ancient trireme. 
He suggests that the concepts used to build the Olympias 
are  overly  complicated,  and  generally  unscientific.  He 
maintains   that  Morrison   and  Coates   misinterpreted 
the  Lenormant   relief  and  argues  that  the  Lenormant 
artist depicted a single row of oars, and the oblique and 
horizontal  lines  cannot  be  used  as  evidence  for  three-
level oar system. Tilley not only concludes that to see a 
three-level oar system in the Lenormant relief is wishful 
thinking, he finds no evidence in any of the iconographic 
sources for three levels of oars (Tilley 1997, 1: ‘But ancient 
literature and iconography have not yet been approached 
in a scientific way. The study of ancient ships seems stuck 
in  a  pre-scientific  time-warp;’  see  also  his  p.  6  on  the 
Lenormant relief).
  Tilley (1976) argues that the ‘tri’ of the trireme actually 
refers to three oarsmen to a ‘room,’ a space produced by 
each bench extending across the ship. Consequently, in 
Tilley’s trireme there are three men abreast (cf. Morrison 
and Williams 1968, 155 defining a ‘room’ as a separate 
space on each side of the ship). He discerns this oar system 
in the Siren vase, an Attic red-figure stamnos of  c. 490 
BC, which in his view depicts the port side of Odysseus’ 
ship with seven oar ports, six oars and four oarsmen. As 
seen  from  above,  the  Siren  vase  allegedly  reveals  three 
men,  each  working  one  oar  extending  across  the  deck. 
The inner rower passes his oar under the arms of the outer 
man. Thus, in each ‘room’ there are two oars over one side 
of the ship and one over the other. It demonstrates the 
three-men-abreast  system.  He  concludes  that  while  the 
Siren vase ship is not a trireme, the Athenians employed 
this system on a larger scale for triremes. In his view, the 
trireme was a triple-banked galley propelled by two levels of 
oarsmen. The oarsman at the lower level sat in the middle 
and served as a sculler (Tilley 1970; 1976, 364). Tilley, 
who cites additional iconographic evidence to support his 
thesis, made extra rowlocks in a standard naval cutter and 
successfully  utilised  the  Siren  vase  arrangement  of  oars 
men (Tilley 1976, 358–9).
  Tilley further argues that around 470 BC when Cimon 
broadened the decks of hise triremes, he was simply making 
room for four oarsmen. Thus two men now replace Tilley’s 
robust  oarsman  who  previously   wielded  two  oars.  In 
this arrangement there are four men to a ‘room,’ one on 
each side at each level increasing the oarsmen from the 
90 deployed on the ships that won the battle of Salamis 
to 120 who defeated the Persians at Eurymedon. Tilley’s 
90 to 120 oarsmen go against the well-documented fact 
that there were 170 oarsmen assignment to each trireme. 
This presents no problem to Tilley who argues that the 
===== PAGE 118 =====
14. The Reconstructed Trireme Olympias and Her Critics 105
pentekontarchos, apparently the pursuer, kept the names 
of 50 men on the books who had some unspecified role 
in supporting the trireme. Thus Tilley appends these 50 
reservists to Cimon’s alleged 120 oarsmen and tallies the 
trireme’s  170  oarsmen.  With  such  an  arrangement  of 
oarsmen there is no need for thalamians. Tilley concludes 
that  the  Olympias   not  only  produced   an  impractical 
rowing system, with thalamians crouched so low beneath 
the benches above them that they could not be effective, 
but that three levels of oars men contradicts the ancient 
sources  (Tilley  1970,  366–9).  Tilley  calls  for  a  revised 
understanding of the terms ‘bank’ and ‘room,’ suggesting 
that much of the murkiness results from their inaccurate 
use.  Furthermore,  this  seaman  finds  the  data  on  speed 
confusing, varying from a projected 12 knots to 2.9 knots. 
He maintains that the hold of the Olympias with room 
for sixty is too large while the space below the deck of 
the ancient trireme was extremely confined (Tilley 1997, 
12–13).
  We now have much to ponder and assess. Let us review 
the  development  of  the  trireme  and  the  iconographic 
evidence before addressing Tilley’s views. There is no vase 
painting, likeness on coins, or sculpted artwork until the 
6th century BC that suggests a three-level system of oars. 
According  to  Thucydides  (1.12.4–13),  the  Corinthians 
were the first Greeks to build triremes, and Ameinocles, 
a Corinthian shipwright, designed four modern ships for 
the Corinthians some three hundred years before the end 
of the Peloponnesian War, c. 700 BC. Some scholars thus 
place the first triremes at the end of the eighth century 
BC, while others dismiss Thucydides’ statement and put 
the appearance of the triremes about a century and a half 
later. Ameinocles probably had something to do with the 
first triremes, but it seems that they may have been too 
expensive and at first not sufficiently efficient to warrant 
the building of fleets, and so did not attract the attention 
of  artists  (Papalas  1997).  Tilley  (1976,  366)  notes  ‘no 
practical man will suppose that the first triremes had 170 
oarsmen ... A jump from 50 to 170 oarsmen is incredible.’ 
There no doubt was an evolutionary process which was not 
amply recorded in the literary or iconographic evidence, 
but Thucydides (1.14.1) does distinguish long ships from 
pentecontors and triremes (see the comment of Morrison 
1978, 207–208.). The side of a trireme was honeycombed 
with oar-holes, some of them closed with askomata (leather 
sleeves). It was clearly no easy task for an artist who was 
probably not a seaman and usually saw ships in harbour 
without the crew to accurately depict these apertures with 
a vertical triad of oarsmen (Morrison and Williams 1968, 
169; Coates and Morrison 1993, 134). And the artists who 
attempted to depict the early triremes did not come from 
Corinth, Ionia and Western Greece, which pioneered the 
trireme, but rather from Athens, a state lagging behind 
others in adopting the trireme. Morrison catalogues ship 
representations from 760 BC to 480 BC, and notes that 
out of 158, 106 are of Attic origin. The largest non-Attic 
groups  are  seventh-century   Boeotian  figulae  depicting 
outlines of ships. The Corinthian evidence of the first half 
of the sixth century BC is too fragmentary to be useful 
(Morrison and Williams 1968, 73–118; Morrison 1978, 
206–7).
  The  poet  Hipponax,  a  native  of  Ephesus,  in 
c.  540 
BC, was the first writer to mention a trireme with a ram 
(Hipponax frag. 45 Diehl; Morrison and Williams 1968, 
120). He ridiculed the painter Mimnes for painting a snake 
on the side of a many-benched trireme to look as if it was 
running away from the ram and towards the helmsman. 
It  is  not  clear  whether  Mimnes  was  commissioned  to 
embellish  the  ram  of  a  trireme  or  in  fact  adorning  a 
vase with a representation of this type of vessel. It is not 
important for our purpose. Mimnes did not know that the 
snake, an apotropaic, had to be facing the enemy. He had 
it confronting its own crew. The significance of Mimnes’ 
trireme is that it provides proof that around 540 BC the 
trireme had emerged as a warship equipped with a ram. 
Mimnes may have made a mistake in depicting the ram 
because it was a recent addition to the trireme, and that 
in the earlier stages of this vessel it was not equipped with 
a trireme and did not have military functions. It gradually 
became a war vessel. According to Herodotus (5.99.1) in 
495 BC the Ionians mustered 353 triremes against 600 
Persian at the battle of Lade.
  Artists like Mimnes, however, were not concerned with 
precise details. There was a fanciful element in their work, 
which intended to give a flavour of the sea. Representations 
of  athletic   events  were  no  more  accurate   than  those 
portraying naval scenes. One would think that the artist 
commissioned to portray athletes in action on vases, which 
were often awarded to a victor, would take care to depict 
the contests accurately. In a famous Panathenaic amphora 
in the British Museum (Harris 1964, pl. 3 and p. 228 n. 
3), the runners are shown in an absurd posture with left 
arm and left leg proceeding together. Harris (1964, 87) 
also makes some interesting comments on the inaccuracy 
of  Myron’s  famous  statue,  the  Discobolos.  The  artistic 
interpretation of ships under oars was a more difficult task 
than depicting athletes in action, and it was certainly no 
more accurate (see the remarks of Basch 1985, 41. Tilley 
1997, 2–3 takes Basch to task for later arguing that Greek 
artists provided photographic realism in their depiction 
of ships; cf. Basch 1988, 177. Basch, however, suggests 
this hypothesis only to dismiss it and concludes (1988, 
179) that ‘the certitude lies in the lack of precision and 
gaucheness of the sculptor representing certain elements 
in the Lenormant relief’). This, of course, does not mean 
that pictographic evidence is worthless for either athletic or 
maritime matters. Unfortunately, Mimnes’ painting does 
not survive. But we do have, as noted above, significant 
representations of the trireme. The Lenormant relief and 
the Talos vase come from the fifth century BC, and both 
indicate a three level system of oars. T rajan’s column dates 
to the early second century AD. The artist sculpted details 
about  military  garb,  equipment,   standards  and  ships, 
although in doing so he enormously magnified the people 
===== PAGE 119 =====
Anthony J. Papalas106
relative  to  the  size  of  the  ships.  The  admiral’s  flagship, 
with  three  tiers  of  oars,  is  a  trireme.  The  iconographic 
evidence stretching from the fifth first century BC to the 
second century AD proves the three level oar system of 
the trireme (Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, xx–xxi, 
and the remarks of Torr 1894, 212–213; on realism, see 
Rossi 1971, 14–16, ill. 41). 
  The  above  survey  of  the  development  of  the  trireme 
demonstrates that the Greeks did not simply leap from 
a 50 oared vessel to one of 170 overnight. Furthermore, 
the  evidence  is  clear  that  the  trireme  was  prominent 
a  good  half  century  before  the  Persian  Wars  and  that 
there  is  considerable  evidence  dealing  with  its  tri-level 
oar  system. Tilley’s  analysis  of  the  trireme  suffers  from 
his lack of knowledge about the history of the period in 
which the trireme flourished. But for the sake of argument 
let  us  temporally  disregard  this  compelling  literary  and 
iconographic   evidence  about  a  three-level  system  and 
assume the possibility of Tilley’s trireme with 90 rowers 
arranged   on  two  levels.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  the 
operation of such a vessel. The man in the middle, pulling 
two oars each about 14 feet long, would have to possess 
fantastic strength to perform his task. His oar would pass 
under the chest of his colleague on the side, thus restricting 
the manipulation of his oars. Furthermore, such an oar 
system could not produce the manoeuvrability required to 
carry out a diekplous. Tilley’s oarsmen spread across the 
deck would have interfered with the fighting personnel. 
At the Battle of Lade in 495 BC the Persians added an 
additional  40  soldiers  to  their  deck  personnel  bringing 
the number of fighting men to 70. It would have been 
impossible for these soldiers, or even half that number, to 
fight from the deck of Tilley’s trireme. 
  Tilley’s  figure  of  90  oarsmen  for  the  triremes  of  the 
Persian Wars disregards not only the register listing three 
classes of oars, thranite, zygian and thalamian numbering 
62, 54, 54 (Morrison 1941, 24; Morrison and Williams 
1968,  122  ff.,  134;  Morrison  1978,  204;  for  a  critique 
of Tilley’s trireme, see Coates 1995, 160), but the report 
of  Herodotus  (7.184.1)  that  ships  at  Salamis  had  200 
crew  members,  170  oarsmen  and  30  marines  Morrison 
and  Williams  1968,  122ff;  Morrison  1978,  203).  But 
for the moment let us assume that all of the literary and 
inscriptional evidence that attest to 170 oarsmen in the 
early decades of the 5th century are inaccurate and Tilley 
is right about 90 oarsmen. This leads us to one of Tilley’s 
most ingenious arguments that the pentekontarchos was an 
officer who kept the names of 50 oarsmen on the books. 
What was the role of the pentekontarchos before this date? 
Furthermore, Tilley’s 120 oarsmen, three to a bench, would 
not fit on such a deck, and this arrangement would require 
an  impossibly  long  ship.  It  is  curious  that  Tilley,  who 
is  calling  for  higher  scientific  standards,  simply  ignores 
evidence  when  it  does  not  support  his  thesis.  His  trial 
with the naval cutter does not demonstrate much since it 
produced negligible speed in tranquil waters (Tilley 1992b, 
fig. 8). 
  Tilley’s  objection  to  the  hold  of  the  Olympias  being 
too large may have some merit. According to Herodotus 
(8.118)  after  Salamis  Xerxes  fled  to  Thrace  where  he 
boarded  a  Phoenician  trireme  sailing  from  Eion  to  the 
Hellespont.  This  story  is  clearly  apocryphal  for  Xerxes 
returned  to  Asia  by  land  but  it  does  reflect  conditions 
on  the  deck  of  a  trireme.  A  sudden  storm  endangered 
the ship. The helmsman advised Xerxes to get rid of his 
fellow Persians on deck. Accommodating the king, they 
jumped overboard.  Herodotus (8.119) dismissed the story 
of  Persian  notables  sacrificing  themselves  to  save  their 
master because it would have been more practical to force 
the 54 Phoenician at the thalamian oars to abandon ship 
and relinquish their place to the Persian notables. 
  Scholars generally interpret this passage as proof that 
there was little room below deck. The Olympias, on the other 
hand, has a spacious hold (Morrison, Coates and Rankov 
2000, 130–131 and Tilley 1997, 14). Herodotus and his 
audience would have assumed that Xerxes was travelling 
with a large retinue, let us say 100 men, and many valuable 
possessions and there was room enough below the deck to 
accommodate a number of men and supplies along with 
the thalamians. Indeed the Persians deployed their triremes 
more than the Greeks for transporting men and supplies. 
We must also note that the trireme in question here was 
Phoenician  and  these  vessels  were  generally  faster  than 
Greek triremes and possibly constructed with somewhat 
smaller holds. In this case Xerxes would have been taking 
the fastest trireme available. But it does seem that the space 
below the deck of the Olympias is somewhat too large. 
  Let us examine more carefully Tilley’s post-Persian war 
trireme.  Tilley’s  120  oarsmen  for  the  “Cimon  model” 
requires  four  oarsmen  abreast.  This  arrangement  is  an 
improvement over his Persian war trireme in that it replaces 
the  dubious  sculler,  but  it  leads  to  another  mechanical 
impossibility. Tilley’s new trireme is even less stable than his 
old one. This ship of 135 feet for a beam of 8 ft could not 
be housed in the ship-sheds built for the Athenian triremes, 
and would be too clumsy to perform any of the manoeuvres 
required  in  trireme  warfare  (Tilley  1976,  365–366;  cf. 
Morrison  1978,  205). Tilley,  without  much  knowledge 
of the history of the 5th century BC, misunderstands the 
purpose of Cimon’s overhauling triremes of Persian war 
vintage. They were about 20 years old, near the end of their 
life span, and clearly not as quick and agile as when the 
Athenians had deployed them against the Persians. Thus 
Cimon transformed some triremes into troop transports 
with fighting platforms by enlarging their beams and thus 
widening their decks. The purpose of this modification was 
not to add oarsmen but to provide space for hoplites who, 
at Eurymedon, fought from the decks and then pursued 
the  enemy  and  won  a  land  victory   (Morrison   1993, 
15; Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 153–154). By 
widening the deck, Cimon improved the trireme’s stability 
and  enhanced  its  sail-carrying  capacity,  but  reduced  its 
ability to perform the manoeuvres necessary for ramming. 
There is no reason to believe that Cimon’s modified the 
===== PAGE 120 =====
14. The Reconstructed Trireme Olympias and Her Critics 107
oar system of the Athenian trireme. The type of triremes 
the Athenians deployed at Salamis was similar to the ships 
Phormio and other Athenian admirals commanded some 
fifty years later in the Peloponnesian War. 
Conclusion
Can a scientifically based reconstruction of a ship type be 
made when there are no physical remains? The answer is 
yes, if the iconographic and literary sources are adequate. In 
the case of the trireme these sources exist, but scholars have 
not entirely agreed on their adequacy and meaning. The 
builders of the Olympias by carefully analysing the evidence 
comprehended  the  trireme’s  physical  requirements  for 
speed, oar power, weight, displacement stability and hull 
strength. While the Olympias may not be a replica of the 
ancient trireme it is a reasonable facsimile. 
  The ancient sources report a remarkable performance 
level of the Greek trireme under oar. It achieved maximum 
efficiency  with  the  materials  and  technology  available 
to  fifth-century   Greek  shipwrights.   But  the  Greeks 
used  a  quality   of  timber   no  longer   available   in  the 
Mediterranean. Thus in Olympias Douglas fir was employed 
for the planking, iroko for the keel, and live oak for the 
tenons. Basch (1987b, 104) in a spirit of antiquarianism 
protested  about  the  sealing  of  the  seams  of  Olympias 
with  polysulphide  elastomer.  Furthermore,  the  builders 
used modern underwater paints, treated the timber with 
preservatives, and employed power hand tools. It cannot 
be expected that men are capable of building a modern 
trireme with exactly the same materials and technology 
used to construct the originals of the time of Themistocles, 
but it is reasonable to expect that they can adhere to these 
factors as much as possible while achieving the same high 
performance   level.  Historians  like  myself  may  not  be 
able to judge fully the relative merits of conflicting and 
untested hypotheses about ships, nor fully understand the 
physical essentials which triremes demanded in their design 
according to factors of physiology and engineering. They 
can,  however,  understand  the  literary  and  iconographic 
evidence, and assess the results and lessons from any actual 
tests  and  trials.  The  Olympias is  more  than  a  ‘floating 
hypothesis’  (McGrail  1992).  To  a  great  extent,  it  has 
resolved the trireme puzzle! With 170 amateur oarsmen 
rowing  at  three  levels,  it  achieved  a  speed  of  about  8 
knots, and performed like its ancient Greek counterpart. 
With a more professional crew, trained more rigorously, 
the  performance  level  should  be  moderately  enhanced 
while  a  second  reconstructed  trireme  with  some  slight 
modifications   would   improve   the  performance   level 
considerably.  Until  other  hypotheses  are  explored  and 
tested by experiment, the Olympias should be accepted as 
an authentic representative of the type of ship upon which 
the Athenians based their fifth-century thalassocracy.
Bibliography
Angel, J. L. (1971) The People of Lerna: analysis of a prehistoric 
Aegean population. Princeton,  NJ,  American  School  of 
Classical Studies at Athens.
Basch,  L.  (1979)  Roman  triremes  and  the  outriggerless 
Phoenician trireme. The Mariner’s Mirror 65, 289–326.
Basch, L. (1985) Appendix A to the Thera ships as sailing 
vessels. The Mariner’s Mirror 71.4, 413–15.
Basch, L. (1987a) Le musée imaginaire de la marine antique. 
Athens,  Hellenic  Institute  for  Preservation  of  Nautical 
T radition.
Basch, L. (1987b) Review article of The Greek Trireme of the 
Fifth Century B.C.: discussion of a projected reconstruction 
edited by John Coates and Seàn McGrail, and The Athenian 
Trireme: the history and reconstruction of an ancient Greek 
warship by J. S. Morrison and J. F . Coates. The Mariner’s 
Mirror 73.1, 93–105.
Basch, L. (1988) The Eleusis Museum trireme and the Greek 
trireme. The Mariner’s Mirror 74.2, 163–197.
Basch, L. (1990) La galère de l’Antiquité. In Quand voguaient 
les galères. Paris, 22–23.
Coates,  J.  F . (1993)  Carrying  troops  in  triremes.  In  Shaw 
1993a, 78–81.
Coates, J. F . (1995) Tilley’s and Morrison’s triremes – evidence 
and practicality. Antiquity 69, 159–162.
Coates, J. F . and Morrison, J. S. (1993) The sea trials of the 
reconstructed Athenian trireme Olympias: a reply to Lucien 
Basch. The Mariner’s Mirror 79.2, 131–141.
Coates, J. F . and Shaw, J. T . (1993) Hauling a trireme out on 
a slip or a beach. In Shaw 1993a, 87–90.
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K., and Shaw, J. T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988: report on the Anglo-Hellenic sea trials of 
Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Daremberg,   Ch.  and  Saglio,  E.  (1904) 
Dictionnaire des 
antiquités grecques et romaines Vol.  IV:  N–Q.  Paris, 
Librairie Hachette et Cie.
Hanson, V . D. (1989) The Western Way of War: infantry battle 
in Classical Greece. New York, A. A. Knopf.
Hanson, V . D. (ed.) (1991) Hoplites: the Classical Greek battle 
experience. London, Routledge.
Harris, H. A. (1964) Greek Athletes and Athletics. London, 
Hutchinson.
McGrail,  S.  (1992)  Replicas,  reconstructions  and  floating 
hypotheses. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 
21, 353–355.
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1941)  The  Greek  trireme.  The Mariner’s 
Mirror 27.1, 14–4.
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1978)  Rowing  the  trireme.  The Mariner’s 
Mirror 64.3, 203–208.
Morrison, J. S. (1988) The second British sea trials of the 
reconstructed trireme, 20 July–5 August, 1988. Antiquity 
62, 713–714.
Morrison, J. S. (1991) Ancient Greek measures of length in 
nautical contexts. Antiquity 65, 298–305.
Morrison, J. S. (1993) Triereis: the evidence from antiquity. 
In Shaw 1993a, 11–20.
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1996)  Greek and Roman Oared warships, 
399–30 BC Oxbow  Monograph  62.  Oxford,  Oxbow 
Books.
===== PAGE 121 =====
Anthony J. Papalas108
Morrison, J. S. and Williams, R. T . (1968) Greek Oared Ships, 
900–322 BC. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Morrison,  J.  S.,  Coates,  J.  F .  and  Rankov,  N.  B.  (2000) 
The Athenian Trireme: the history and reconstruction of 
an ancient warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,   Cambridge 
University Press.
Papalas, A. J. (1997) The development of the trireme. The 
Mariner’s Mirror 83.3, 259–271.
Rankov, N. B. (1994) Reconstructing the past: the operation 
of the trireme reconstruction Olympias in the light of the 
historical sources. The Mariner’s Mirror 80.2, 131–46.
Rossi, L. (1971) Trajan’s Column and the Dacian Wars, transl. 
J. M. C. T oynbee. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.
Shaw, J. T . (1993a) The Trireme Project: operational experience 
1987–90. Lessons learnt Oxbow Monograph 31. Oxford, 
Oxbow Books.
Shaw, J. T . (1993b) The voyage and speed trials of Olympias 
in 1990. In Shaw 1993a, 39–44.
Shaw, J. T . (1993c) The resistance/speed curve of Olympias, 
with a section on rudder resistance by Ian McCallum. In 
Shaw 1993a, 45–7.
Shaw, J. T . (1993d) Rowing Olympias: further lessons from 
the sea trials. In Shaw 1993a, 58–68.
Shaw, J. T . (1993e) ‘Rowing astern’ in Shaw 1993a, 69–70.
Shaw, J. T . (1993f)  The meshing of oars in Olympias and in 
a ‘stretched’ design. In Shaw 1993a, 75–77.
Shaw, J. T . (1993g) Steering to ram: the diekplous and periplous, 
with a section by John Coates and John Haywood. In Shaw 
1993a, 99–104.
Starr, C. G. (1941) The Roman Imperial Navy, 31 BC–AD 
324. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.
Tilley,  A.  F .  (1970)  The  ship  of  Odysseus.  Antiquity 44, 
100–104. 
Tilley,  A.  F.  (1976)   Rowing   the  trireme   –  a  practical 
experiment  in  seamanship.  The Mariner’s Mirror 62.4, 
357–369.
Tilley, A. F . (1992a) Rowing astern – an ancient technique 
revived. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 21, 
55–60.
Tilley, A. F . (1992b) Three men to a room – a completely 
different trireme. Antiquity 66, 599–610.
Tilley, A. F . (1997) Ancient warships – a scientific approach. 
In Cogar, W .B. (ed.), New Interpretations in Naval History: 
selected papers from the Twelfth Naval History Symposium. 
Annapolis MD, Naval Institute Press, 1ff.
Torr,  C.  (1894)   Ancient Ships. Cambridge,   Cambridge 
University Press (reissued 1964. Chicago, Argonaut).
Torr,  C.  (1904)  ‘Navis’  in  Daremberg  and  Saglio  1904, 
24–40
Welsh, F . (1988) Building the Trireme. London, Constable.
===== PAGE 122 =====
15.  Beyond Olympias: an outsider’s view
1. Introduction
In  discussing   what  we  have  discovered  about  ancient 
triremes  since  Olympias  was  designed  and  launched,  it 
is  useful  to  distinguish  between  what  was  learned  from 
experiments in which Olympias was used as a tool, and 
what  was  learned  from  other  investigations   into  how 
the  ancient   trireme   was  operated,   but  in  which  the 
reconstruction   played  no  role.  In  addition,   there  are 
some  problems  associated  with  ancient  triremes  which 
remain unresolved. Making the distinction between these 
categories of problems will help us to focus on the different 
requirements which an ancient trireme had to fulfil, and 
which a modern reconstruction, such as any successor to 
Olympias, must match.
  The  author  is  an  outsider  in  the  sense  that  he  took 
no  part  in  the  work  of  the  T rireme  T rust,  but  he  has 
investigated a number of technical aspects of oared ships in 
ancient Greece. The results of these investigations, reported 
in a number of publications, form the basis from which the 
author will attempt to pinpoint problems requiring further 
examination. These, together with the results obtained in 
Olympias, may help to serve as a base for a programme of 
further experimentation, and in particular, for the design 
of a new trireme reconstruction.
  In the view of this outsider, it appears that so far the 
experimental effort, which has been executed admirably, has 
been focused largely on the oarsystem and the organisation 
of the rowing. These are undoubtedly important aspects 
of the ship which lend themselves most readily to testing 
by experiment in the first stage of investigation, but other 
aspects have to be kept in mind as well.
  The  experimental   results   obtained   so  far  are  best 
discussed by those who organised the sea trials, but their 
manner of continuation will depends to a large extent on 
requirements  other  than  those  of  the  oarsystem.  What 
should be avoided is for some of these to be quietly ignored, 
e.g. because they appear at first sight to be inconvenient. If 
some passages in the literature on triremes remain puzzling, 
the fact should be stated clearly and explicitly. This would 
André Wegener Sleeswyk
be  in  keeping  with  the  scientific  approach  which  is  a 
declared aim of the trireme project according to Rankov 
(1989), and involves weighing pros and cons of proposed 
reconstructions against what is known from all the known 
literary texts and all the available iconography.
  Now  that  the  practicality  of  the  three-level  rowing 
system  has  been  established  beyond  reasonable  doubt 
– an important achievement – refinement or modification 
of that oarsystem is in order to raise the performance to 
an  historically  acceptable  level.  Moreover,  the  military 
function of the trireme should now receive the same careful 
attention  which  was  given  to  the  oarsystem.  The  ship’s 
principal weapon was the ram. A corollary of the use of 
this armament is that the retardation or deceleration of 
the attacking ship upon ramming is a dire necessity. The 
unpleasant consequences for the way the crew members 
could   fulfil   their   various   tasks   should   receive   more 
attention. In particular, deceleration influences the ship’s 
secondary military function of acting as a platform for the 
marines who were part of the crew.
  The military aspect of the trireme apparently received 
comparatively little attention when Olympias was designed. 
For instance, the gangway was considered primarily as a 
passageway for allowing the oarsmen to urinate regularly, 
and its military use received scant attention. That the effect 
of  ramming  was  not  tested  to  any  extent  on  Olympias 
is  understandable,   but  the  outsider  wonders  why,  for 
instance, no computer simulation of the effects of the act 
of ramming on the attacking ship has been undertaken, 
analogous to the computer simulations of the effects of 
collisions which are routinely performed in the automobile 
industry, and as suggested earlier by Rankov (1989, 65).
The  oarsystem,  although  investigated  first,  is  essentially 
a  corollary  of  the  requirement  that  the  ramming  blow 
be  delivered  with  sufficient  momentum.  The  latter  is  a 
mechanical quantity of a magnitude which is equal to the 
arithmetical product of mass and velocity of the ship. The 
mass is something which is better discussed as a property 
of the hull, but in any case, the velocity has to be as high 
===== PAGE 123 =====
André Wegener Sleeswyk110
as possible if the ramming blow dealt to the enemy is to 
be as fierce as it can be. 
  A third aspect of the ship to be considered is the hull 
itself, its shape, principal dimensions, displacement, and 
the  methods  employed  in  its  construction.  The  vessel’s 
functions as a warship, the requirement of sufficient speed 
and the necessity to conform to the available archaeological 
and  historical   evidence,  e.g.  dimensions   of  shipsheds, 
allusions in the literature bearing on draught, the width 
of the outrigger etc., should all be taken into account in 
determining the design parameters of the hull, which, in 
their turn, influence the design of the oarsystem also. One 
must remember that no remains of a Greek trireme have 
been found to date, so the evidence is not nearly as firm as 
we would like it to be. Consequently, hull reconstructions 
are of necessity no more than floating conjectures. 
2. Ramming
i) Various aims of ramming
The author has argued earlier (Sleeswyk 1996) on the basis 
of elementary mechanics that, depending on the relative 
values  of  the  displacements  of  the  attacking  ship  and 
the ship being rammed, the attacker could either try to 
hole his opponent, or, if the displacement of his ship was 
relatively large, to cause his victim to capsize or roll over. 
If the latter was the aim, the ram of the attacking ship had 
to be elevated above the water line. A third possible aim 
of ramming was to break the oars of the enemy ship. In 
the literature, references are found to all three modes of 
incapacitating the enemy. A few examples of each method 
are given here:
a) Holing the hull of the enemy’s ship
Diodorus Siculus (13.99.4):
‘Last of all he rammed the trireme of Pericles with a rather 
heavy blow and broke a great hole in the trireme ...’
Polybius (16.4.12–13): 
‘... but piercing him below water produced breaches which 
could not be repaired.’
b) Capsizing the ship of the adversary:
Aeschylus (
Persians 417–420): 
‘...  while  the  Hellenic   galleys,   not  heedless   of  their 
chance,  hemmed  them  in  and  battered  them  on  every 
side. The hulls of our vessels rolled over and the sea was 
hidden from our sight, strewn as it was with wrecks and 
slaughtered men.’
The elevated bows of a large ship and the waterline ram of 
a smaller one are referred to by Polybius (16.3.8–9):
‘Dinocrates  engaged  an  ‘eight’  and  himself  received  his 
adversary’s blow above the waterline, since the opposing 
vessel  had  its  bows  elevated,   but  striking   the  enemy 
underneath ... he could not at first get free of her although 
he repeatedly tried to back out.’
c) Breaking the oars of the enemy:
Aeschylus (
Persians 416):
‘... shattering their whole array of oars
Diodorus Siculus (13.99.3–4):
‘ ... and from others he tore away the rows of oars and 
rendered them useless for the fighting.’
ii) Ramming deceleration
An estimate of the retardation or deceleration of the hull 
when one ship rams another has been calculated by John 
Coates (Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 221–2). He 
shows that if a ship is brought to rest from a speed of 10 
knots in a distance of one metre by a constant force, the 
deceleration can be estimated at 13 m/sec2. That value is 
one-third more than the acceleration of gravity. If the hull 
weighs 50 tonnes, the force on the hull due to deceleration 
is 66 tonnes, which is relatively small.
  Coates   very  properly   considers   the  maximum   de-
celeration  upon  ramming  rather  than  the  average  value. 
But such a maximum might have been higher still when 
a  trireme  rammed  a  heavier  adversary  amidships,  as  is 
reported  not  infrequently  in  descriptions  of  sea-battles. 
The deceleration will often have been much less than this 
maximum value, but the design must be based on a worst 
case scenario.
  If one considers the effect of the deceleration estimated 
by  Coates  on  the  oarsmen  rather  than  on  the  hull,  it 
implies that an oarsman weighing 75 kg would suddenly 
be subjected to a horizontal force of 100 kilograms pushing 
him backwards towards the prow. As will be seen, that force 
might have been considerably higher than this estimate, 
implying that crew members might be subjected to sudden, 
and on the human scale, truly violent forces, when their 
ship rammed an enemy.
  An  alternative   way  of  arriving   at  a  value  for  the 
deceleration upon ramming is based on the shape which 
the Athlit ram was given. The sort of damage which that 
type of ram was designed to inflict on the hull has been 
described succinctly by Steffy (1983): 
‘First of all, this ram was designed to pound the surface of 
an enemy hull rather than to pierce it. The ram head, in 
fact, seems carefully designed to prevent it from impaling 
a victim.’ 
The  ram  indented  the  hull  of  the  enemy  ship,  causing 
the planking or the horizontal seams immediately above 
and below the contact area to tear by shearing, and the 
interconnecting  tenons  to  break,  but  it  did  not  pierce 
the strakes in-between. When the ram was subsequently 
retracted, the ragged torn seams would not close again, 
resulting in huge leaks if they were below the waterline.
  That the design aimed at avoiding the ram being caught 
between the upper and lower torn seams of the rammed 
hull explains the purpose of the slight reduction in height 
of the Athlit ram immediately behind the vertical frontal 
===== PAGE 124 =====
15. Beyond Olympias: an outsider’s view 111
area  (Fig.  15.1).  It  is  only  some  48  centimetres  behind 
that frontal area that the height regains its initial value; 
the  maximum  reduction  in  height  occurs  at  about  half 
this distance. Apparently, the design of the ram was based 
on a maximum indentation of 48 cm and perhaps more 
usually half of that. This observation allows us to estimate 
the  deceleration  upon  ramming  on  a  somewhat  more 
quantitative basis than before. 
  In  order  to  obtain  this  estimate,  it  is  assumed  that 
the hulls of the ramming and the rammed ships suffered 
an  inelastic  collision,  such  that  after  some  time  interval 
∆t  during  which  the  ram  indented  the  enemy  ship,  the 
two  hulls  were  moving  at  the  same  velocity  (Fig.  15.2). 
Additional   assumptions   are  that  the  two  hulls   were 
equally heavy and that the victim was rammed amidships 
perpendicular to its midline. The only velocity component 
considered here is the one perpendicular to the midline of 
the victim. The potential theory of hydrodynamics predicts 
(Lamb  1879;  Sleeswyk  1996)  that  the  influence  of  the 
surrounding water manifests itself by the acceleration of the 
submerged hull of the victim taking place at a rate as if the 
inertia of the hull had been doubled. When the ram has 
come to rest relative to the victim after impact, the common 
velocity  of  the  two  ships  would  therefore  have  been  ⅓ 
of  the  velocity  of  the  attacking  ship  just  before  impact.
   The velocity-versus-time diagram presented in Fig. 15.2 
illustrates the effect of ramming on both the attacker and 
the victim. The velocity of the attacker decreases from va 
to vf , while the transverse velocity of the victim increases 
from zero to vf . If it is assumed that the hull is indented 
by the ram over a distance of 45 cm at most, and if va is 5 
m/s (10 knots), the time interval ∆t may be calculated as 
0.22 s. The magnitude of the deceleration of the attacker, 
which is represented by the slope of the trajectory AD in 
the diagram, is then 2/3 × 5 × 1/0.22 = 15.0 m/s2, i.e. 
about 1½ times the acceleration of gravity. An oarsman 
weighing 75 kg would be pulled forward to the prow with 
a force of 113 kg, somewhat more than Coates’ value.
  But the use of the inelastic collision model allows us 
to  go  beyond  that  simple  estimate,  and  to  investigate, 
for instance, the effect on the deceleration if the trireme 
rammed  a  heavier  ship.  If  the  ram  indented  the  hull 
of  a  quinquereme  over  the  same  distance,  the  greater 
displacement   of  the  adversary   (about  twice  that  of  a 
trireme)  would  cause  an  increase  of  the  value  of  the 
deceleration   of  the  attacker   to  about   18  m/s2.  The 
horizontal  force  on  the  75  kg  oarsman  would  then  be 
Figure 15.1. The Athlit ram, showing the point at which the curved upper surface returns to the height of the front end.
Figure 15.2. Schematic velocity/time graph of ships during 
ramming. ∆t marks the time taken for the ram of the attacking 
ship to indent the hull of the ship being rammed.
===== PAGE 125 =====
André Wegener Sleeswyk112
about 137 kg. But it might well be that the ram would 
not  penetrate  as  deeply  into  the  structure  of  the  more 
heavily built ship, in which case the deceleration would 
be larger still. In the light of these various considerations, 
a moderate but realistic design estimate of the value which 
the maximum deceleration might attain would be 2 g, i.e. 
twice  the  value  of  the  acceleration  of  gravity.  Although 
that maximum deceleration would, presumably, not have 
been attained very often during the lifetime of a trireme, 
it was a contingency which should not have impaired in 
any way the functioning of the ship. The corresponding 
sudden horizontal force on the 75 kg oarsman would be 
150 kg, which would be, as stated before, a truly violent 
force on the human scale. 
iii) The effects of deceleration and measures  
to counteract them
Ramming, then, could have had the effect of pushing the 
bodies of the oarsmen and other crew members towards 
the  prow  with  great  force,  which  would  be  dangerous 
enough in itself. That danger is exemplified by the fate 
of  the  Spartan  admiral  Callicratidas,  who,  according  to 
Xenophon  (Hellenica 1.6.33)  was  flung  in  the  sea  and 
disappeared when his ship rammed an enemy. But even 
for the oarsmen who were firmly seated, the tendency of 
the oarlooms to be flung towards the prow upon impact 
would present a real danger. Obviously, the question of 
what safety measures might have been taken in order to 
obviate the ill effects of deceleration in the attacking ship 
needs further consideration. 
  The interior of the ship would have been designed in 
such a way that the chances of oarsmen being hurt when 
their ship rammed an adversary would be minimised. The 
interior of Olympias was obviously not designed to meet 
that requirement, but in designing any new reconstruction 
it would seem that this aspect ought to be given careful 
thought.  It  does  not  seem  probable,  for  example,  that 
oarsmen  sat  in  individual  seats,  from  which  they  could 
thrown by the ramming impact. It would have been safer 
if they sat astride continuous benches aligned alongships, 
such as those which one observes on some representations 
of ancient Egyptian oared ships. 
  Such  an  arrangement  would  suggest  several  obvious 
methods  by  which  the  oarsmen  could  prepare  to  brace 
themselves against deceleration upon impact. For instance, 
the oars might be immobilised, e.g. by attaching a rope 
fixed to the hull round the knob at the end of the oarloom 
(see section 3 i), as schematically indicated in Fig. 15.3, 
or by retracting them as suggested by Rankov (1989, 63) 
and  fixing  the  handles  by  other  means.  In  the  solution 
offered in Fig. 15.3, if the oarsmen took their hands off 
their oars, they would slide back some 15 or 20 cm until 
the  backs  of  their  knees  met  a  restraining  bar  fastened 
athwartships under their bench. They would grip the bar 
with their hands and press their backs against the oar of 
the man sitting forward of them, and await the impact. 
These preparations would be entirely adequate to withstand 
a deceleration of 2 g, and their execution would require 
only a few seconds. Other measures are possible, and this 
example is presented as merely one of a number of options 
to be considered before deciding on the design.
iv) Being rammed
It was noted above (Section 2 i) that according to Aeschylus 
(Persians 418–9)  the  hulls  of  rammed  ships  capsized. 
Aeschylus continues: ‘... and the sea was hidden from our 
sight, strewn as it was with wrecks and slaughtered men’, 
from which it may be deduced that the overturned wrecks 
remained afloat. This implies either that the ships did not 
carry sufficient ballast to sink them, or that they lost their 
ballast when turning turtle. The latter is neither improbable 
nor impossible: 19th century Norwegian fishing boats, for 
instance, were designed so as to loose their ballast upon 
capsizing, ‘so that the crew had something to hang on to’ 
(Færøyvik and Christensen 1979, 86). Even if a great hole 
had been made in the hull by ramming, there might have 
been sufficient time for the crew of the sinking ship to 
overwhelm the crew of the attacker (Diodorus 13.99.4). In 
a capsizing ship, on the other hand, the thalamians sitting 
under the gangway (section 3.iv) would be trapped without 
time to make their escape (Appian Civil Wars 5.107).
3. The oarsystem
i) The type of oar
For some reason which is not clear to the author, the oar 
Figure 15.3. Hypothetical method by which the oarsmen in a 
ramming ship could brace themselves for the shock, as viewed 
from above.
===== PAGE 126 =====
15. Beyond Olympias: an outsider’s view 113
depicted  (Fig.  15.4)  on  the  ‘Cista  Ficoronica’  of  about 
300 BC (Baumeister 1888, 454) appears not to have been 
discussed as evidence for the oarsystem of the trireme. The 
square-ended, narrow blade and the knob at the end of 
the loom are characteristics which would seem to merit 
discussion. A possible use for the knob is discussed above 
in section (2 iii). 
ii) The interscalmium
The term interscalmium as used by Vitruvius should not be 
taken as a heart-to-heart distance, but as the clear distance 
between tholepins, in analogy to the word intercolumnium 
which he uses (e.g. in 3.3.1) to denote the clear distance 
between  columns,  i.e.  from  column  surface  to  column 
surface. The thickness of the tholepin, some 5 cm, must 
be added to Vitruvius’ interscalmium in order to obtain 
the heart-to-heart distance. 
  The value of the heart-to-heart interscalmium depends 
on the unit chosen. If it is based on the common cubit 
of  44.4  cm,  the  value  is  94  cm,  and  if  on  the  newly 
proposed value of the Attic cubit, it is 103 cm. It should 
not be regarded as a foregone conclusion that the larger 
value is the better one, because it aggravates the problem 
of distributing the oarsmen over the length of the ship.
iii) Length of stroke
Since the performance of Olympias has fallen below that 
of the classical trireme as deduced from historical data, 
the need to improve the effectiveness of the stroke in the 
reconstruction is evident. Shaw (1993b and this volume 
pp.  76–81)  has  suggested  that  this  might  be  achieved 
by  making  the  stroke  longer.  The  remedy  proposed  by 
Shaw makes ingenious use of geometry, which allows the 
length of the stroke to be longer than the interscalmium. 
It consists of canting the oarsmen relative to the midline 
of the ship, so that the inboard end of each oar swings 
past the body of the oarsman sitting one place further aft. 
The necessary skewing or canting would be 18.4 degrees, 
‘the angle whose tangent is ⅓’.
  Canting  the  oarsmen  is  at  first  sight  an  attractive 
possibility,   but  it  also  presents   several  disadvantages. 
Elementary mechanics would predict from the parallelogram 
of forces that the propulsive force component of skewed 
oarsmen is inevitably smaller than the force produced by 
the oarsmen. However, some part of the loss of propulsive 
force delivered by the oarsmen – somewhat less than half 
–  may  be  recovered  if  the  hull  deflects  the  turbulence 
produced by the oarblades. The component propelling the 
ship if no such recovery took place may be calculated from 
the laws of mechanics. It is not much smaller than the force 
produced by the oarsmen; with the geometry proposed by 
Shaw, the alongships component of force would be 3/√10 
= 0.949 of that actually produced by the oarsmen. Partial 
recovery of the loss would probably increase that fraction 
to about 0.97. The losses caused by skewing may therefore 
be regarded as equivalent to eliminating 9 oarsmen from 
Figure 15.4. Scene from the Cista Ficoronica: Argonaut with oar.
===== PAGE 127 =====
André Wegener Sleeswyk114
a crew of 170 if no recovery took place, or 5 men taking 
partial recovery into account.
  The other disadvantages are associated with deceleration 
of  the  trireme  in  battle  and  when  ramming  an  enemy. 
Canting would not only have made it more difficult to 
brace the skewed oarsmen against the shock of ramming, 
but also if they suffered smaller decelerations when, after 
a  few  hours  of  battle,  the  ship  had  to  cross  at  speed  a 
sea strewn with wreckage and other flotsam which could 
not all be avoided by the helmsman. These unpredictable 
smaller shocks might have had unpleasant consequences 
for the oarsmen if they occurred while the looms of the 
oars were just passing behind their backs.
  The  alternative  to  canting  the  oarsmen  which  Shaw 
considers is to increase the interscalmium, but he rejects 
this  suggestion  on  the  grounds  that  it  would  make  the 
ship structurally too weak, and that it would add to the 
wetted surface. As argued below, the first is probably true 
for Olympias, but there are reasons for thinking that she 
was rather too lightly constructed (section 4 v), in which 
case the objection is no longer valid. If the hull were more 
heavily built, it could be made longer. If in that case the 
beam  of  the  ship  were  reduced  by  the  same  percentage 
by which the length were increased, both the wetted area 
and the displacement would remain the same. Whether 
a reduction of the wetted area by using a more rational 
cross-section is of any great consequence will be discussed 
in section 4 iv. 
  A  second  alternative  would  be  to  have  the  oarsmen 
pulling on sliding seats or cushions, as proposed by Hale 
(1996)  using  both  technical  and  historical  arguments. 
This would be compatible with the suggestions made in 
section 2 iii as to how the oarsmen might have prepared 
themselves for deceleration upon ramming, but it seems an 
attractive possibility, meriting serious consideration, also 
because it would allow the stroke to be somewhat longer 
than the interscalmium. Thus there might be no need to 
increase the latter, nor to skew the oarsmen.
iv) Arrangement of the oarsmen
If the historical indications are respected, the thalamians 
ought to be seated underneath the katastroma or gangway, 
not next to it, as is argued in section 4 1. There would then 
be more space for them athwartships and no need for them 
to be seated half underneath the zygians, as in Olympias. 
They could be seated vis-vis the zygians in the same manner 
as the latter are seated relative to the thranites. 
  The resulting arrangement was first proposed by Torr 
(1904) and worked out by the author in 1980 for oars of 
equal length (Sleeswyk 1982a). It requires less height (Fig. 
15.5) than the arrangement utilised in Olympias, and the 
details of the 1980 figure which may now seem doubtful, 
e.g.  the  shape  of  the  hull  and  the  absence  of  a  canopy 
deck, are of course not essential to the seating arrangement 
proposed. The comparison with the schematic side view 
shown in the Lenormant relief emphasises the presence 
of an outrigger support, which ought to be present in any 
reconstruction. 
v) Size of oarports and  askomata
Where Olympias appears at first sight to deviate most from 
all  the  known  iconography  of  the  trireme  hull  (Basch 
1987, 285–92) is in the size of the oarports, which seem 
to be larger than anything known from antiquity. Their 
large size is, of course, based on the story in Herodotus of 
Figure 15.5. Schematic drawing of the regular arrangement of oarsmen with oars of equal length across a trireme, as proposed 
by the author in 1980 (Sleeswyk 1982a), compared with a schematic rendering of the Lenormant relief.
===== PAGE 128 =====
15. Beyond Olympias: an outsider’s view 115
the punishment of the trieres captain Scylax, whose head 
was  thrust  through  a  thalamia.  The  explanation  given 
by  Morrison  and  Williams  (1968,  132)  brings  out  the 
somewhat speculative nature of this interpretation: it is 
stated that there ‘can be little doubt that ‘oar-port’ is the 
right translation for the word thalamia’. But, apart from 
the conflicting iconography, some doubt does remain, as 
the word is seemingly attested in this sense in this passage 
only. Other possible apertures in the hull or superstructure 
associated with the thalamos or hold, for instance for access 
or ventilation, ought also to be considered. 
4. The hull
i) Length 
The shipsheds at Zea appear to have been at least 44 m 
long according to the drawings by Dörpfeld (Morrison and 
Williams 1968, pl. 29). The average dry length of these 
slipways was 37 metres around 1900, from which it was 
inferred that around 35 metres was a reasonable overall 
length for a trireme (Morrison and Williams 1968, 285). 
Olympias was given a length of 36.8 m.
  The provisional nature of this conclusion is apparent 
from Blackman’s discussion (Morrison and Williams 1968, 
182) of the effect of a change in the average dry length 
since antiquity. In fact, many land masses in the eastern 
Mediterranean have either risen or sunk by several metres 
relative to sea level over the past two and a half millennia. 
Moreover, it is not credible that the roofs of the shipsheds 
would have covered the wet portion of the slipway to any 
significant extent. Consequently, the Zea sheds may have 
housed ships that had a maximum length of somewhat 
more than 40 metres.
ii) Width
From the clear widths between the columns of the Zea 
shipsheds it may reasonably be inferred that the overall 
width of the trireme was somewhat more than 5 metres 
(Morrison and Williams 1968, 285), but in any case not 
more than about 5.4 m. If the outrigger projected 50 cm 
outwards, the width of the hull from gunwale to gunwale 
would have been 4 to 4.4 m. The outrigger cannot have 
projected less than about 40 cm beyond the deck, because 
otherwise it would have been impossible for the wounded 
Brasidas to fall into it (Thuc. 4.12.1). As the width of the 
gangway was probably about 1.2 m (see below, section 4 
vii), the canopy decks would each have been 1.7 m wide 
at  most,  which  may  have  been  sufficient  because  these 
narrow  decks  were  used  in  action  by  the  marines  only 
when boarding the enemy.
iii) Draught 
According to Thucydides (2.90.6), in the second action 
in the Gulf of Corinth in 429 BC:
‘Some  of  the  ships  they  made  fast  to  their  own  and 
proceeded to tow away empty – though they had already 
captured one with its crew – but some others, which were 
already in tow, were taken from them by the Messenians, 
who came to the rescue, rushed armed as they were into the 
sea, boarded the ships, and fought from their decks.’
The Messenians cannot have waded in full armour to a 
depth of water much exceeding about 1 metre to recapture 
their ships. The draught of these cannot have been much in 
excess of about 90 centimetres, as they were not aground. 
The ships were empty of their crews, and so were lighter 
by 15 tons than when fully manned. With a sinkage of 
1.1 cm per ton (Morrison and Coates 1989, 20), the hulls 
would have been floating about 16 to 17 cm higher than 
with their crews on board. Thus the fully-manned ships 
cannot have had a draught of more than about 100–110 
cm, and probably less.
iv) Shape of cross-section
The shape given to the mid-section of the hull of Olympias 
has  been  justified  as  follows  by  John  Coates  (Morrison 
and Coates 1989, 17):
‘The  normal  method  of  ship-building   in  the  ancient 
Mediterranean,   as  demonstrated   by  underwater 
archaeological work, required a ship of the fourth century 
BC to have a wine-glass shaped mid-section.
The only known example of an oared ship equipped with 
a  ram  which  possessed  a  wine-glass  shaped  mid-section 
is  the  Punic  wreck  of  Marsala.  It  would  seem  that  the 
statement  implying  that  this  shape  was  customary  for 
Greek oared ships requires the support of more evidence, 
the more so because the Marsala ship’s ram was of a type 
that was definitely out-of-date in the Greek world at the 
time of the battle of Salamis.
  T wo additional arguments militate against the notion 
that   a  peaked   cross-sectional   shape   was  commonly 
employed for Greek oared ships:
a)  The peak and its extension add considerably to the wetted 
surface  –  some  15  percent  –  causing  a  proportional 
increase   of  the  resistance   of  the  hull  in  the  water, 
particularly  at  lower  speeds.  In  addition,  the  long  fin 
must have made the turning circle larger than it would 
have been without this appendage. In modern times the 
wine-glass shape has been typical not of a nimble oared 
vessel, but of a weatherly sailer. There does not appear 
to  be  any  literary  evidence  that  the  trireme  might  be 
considered as such.
b)    Most probably there was a continuous development of 
oared ships from Antiquity to the Renaissance, because 
Byzantium was active for a long time in Italy, parts of 
which continued to be claimed by the eastern Empire (see 
e.g. Nicol 1988). The galleys of the Renaissance possessed 
a flaring U-shaped mid-section. If that shape was not 
inherited from ancient Greek and Roman oared ships, 
its provenance would need to be explained. Conversely, 
the hypothesis of a wine-glass shaped cross-section for 
ancient Greek ships implies that there was at some time 
a break in the tradition of shipbuilding; the time and 
cause of that break would then need to be elucidated. 
To date, no evidence for the existence of such a break 
in the tradition has been presented.
===== PAGE 129 =====
André Wegener Sleeswyk116
v) Weights of the hull and ram
In a paper presented in 1996 to the Sixth International 
Symposium  on  Shipbuilding  in  Antiquity,  the  author 
(Sleeswyk 2001) showed that, for oared ships of different 
sizes possessing the same hull proportions, there is a simple 
rule of proportionality, viz. the square of the total number 
of oarsmen rt is proportional to the cube of the number 
of oarsmen contained in one interscalmium on one side of 
the ship ri provided that the length of the interscalmium 
li remains unchanged. The latter will depend on the way 
the  ship  is  rowed,  i.e.  alla zenzile   (li  =  lz)  or  a scaloccio   
(li = ls) or double-manned, i.e. with men working at both 
sides of the loom of the oar (li = ld). 
  The total number of oarsmen on board ships with hulls 
of the same proportions, or ships of the same lineage (i.e. 
employing the same oarsystem), may then be given by the 
formula:
rt = R × ri
3/2 × (lz/li) (1)
in  which  R  is,  within  a  narrow  margin  of  error,  equal 
to the number of oarsmen in a monoreme of the same 
lineage, which in this case is, of course, alla zenzile. The 
reader  is  referred  to  the  aforementioned  paper  for  the 
refinements which can be added to this formula, taking 
into account, for instance, the presence of an outrigger 
which  would  increase   the  space  available   for  seating 
oarsmen.  In  the  accompanying  graph  (Fig.  15.6),  the 
logarithm  of  the  total  number  of  oarsmen  rt  is  plotted 
against the logarithm of ri; according to formula (1), values 
for ships of the same rowing system should be situated 
on straight lines inclined at a slope of 3 to 2, as drawn. 
The data were mostly obtained from Casson (1973) and 
Morrison (1995). The results appear to confirm the idea 
that ships such as the trireme and the quadrireme, were 
modelled on the triacontor. Not all ancient oared ships 
Figure 15.6. Graph plotting the total number of oarsmen in a ship, and the weight of the ram in kgs, against the number 
of oarsmen per interscalmium on one side of the ship. Z, S and D indicate ships rowed alla zenzile, a scaloccio and double-
manned (i.e. with oarsmen on both sides of the loom) respectively. RI and RII refer to ships without outriggers and with outriggers 
respectively. A represents the weight of the Bremerhaven ram and B that of Athlit ram. The dashed lines are drawn at a slope 
of 3 to 2, in accordance with the proposed proportionality rule.
===== PAGE 130 =====
15. Beyond Olympias: an outsider’s view 117
can be regarded as derived from the triacontor, however; 
the data for the pentecontor, for instance, would seem to 
indicate that its rowing system could have been that of a 
hemiolia, for which there is no evidence. 
  The   graph   probably   indicates   that   the   simple 
proportionality rule given above was actually used by the 
ancient  shipbuilders  in  designing  their  ships.  Another 
design rule which they seem to have applied was that the 
weight of the bronze sheath of the ram was proportional 
to  the  number  of  oarsmen  on  board. T wo  such  bronze 
rams  are  known,  those  from  Bremerhaven   and  from 
Athlit, weighing 54 kgs and 465 kgs, respectively. The first 
obviously belonged to a monoreme, the second probably to 
a quadrireme or ‘four’ (Murray and Petsas 1986, 103–14). 
These weights are plotted onto the graph on that basis; it 
may be observed that they accord with the proposed rule 
surprisingly well. These findings imply that the weight of 
a trireme ram would have been approximately 290 kgs.
  The  weight   of  Olympias ’  bronze   ram,  at  203  kg, 
represents approximately 1/200 of the weight of the fully-
manned ship, a fraction which seems to be about right. 
But the foregoing analysis of the historical evidence which 
suggests that the weight of a trireme ram was about 290 kgs, 
leads to an estimate of the weight of 58 tonnes for a fully 
manned and provisioned ship. If, furthermore, the weight 
of the water provision is taken as 8 tonnes (Sleeswyk and 
Meijer 1998), and that of the crew, including the marines, at 
15 tonnes, the weight of the empty hull would be 35 tonnes, 
which  is  considerably  more  than  Olympias’ 25  tonnes. 
  That the weight of the ancient trireme may well have 
been more than that of Olympias is also suggested by what 
Steffy has to say on the subject (Casson and Steffy 1991, 
33): 
‘ ... the very lightest militarily useful trireme would have 
to contain 0.75 ton of material per meter of length. Add 
to that the weight of crew and gear, and there is no doubt 
that the hull would be heavy enough for ramming. But 
even that weight represents a comparatively thin-skinned, 
lightly  braced  hull.  A  heavier  frame  plan  and  planking 
and wales the size of those on the Athlit ship would raise 
hull weight alone to around a ton per meter of length. 
This  is  by  no  means  intended  to  establish  hull  weights 
for warships; my calculations are too primitive for that. 
It  does,  however,  give  an  indication  of  the  weights  we 
are  dealing  with  when  discussing  large  oared  warships. 
Displacement weights of more than a ton per meter of 
hull length are entirely realistic.’
On the basis of Steffy’s observations, it would seem best 
to assume a weight of hull for the trireme between ¾ and 
1 tonne per metre of length. If the hull was 42 m long, 
the  weight  per  length  for  an  empty  hull  of  35  tonnes 
would come to 0.83 tonnes per metre, if 37 m long, to 
0.95 tonnes per metre. Both values fall within the range 
of Steffy’s estimates.
  Olympias’  weight  of  25  tonnes  for  a  length  of  36.8 
metres is equivalent to 0.68 tonnes per metre of length. 
If  that  hull  had  to  be  able  to  withstand  a  maximum 
decelaration  of  about  2  g  upon  ramming  an  adversary 
without damage to itself or the crew, it would probably 
have  had  to  be  constructed  more  solidly,  which  would 
have entailed more weight.
  An additional reason for supposing that the hull of a 
Greek trireme was more heavily built than that of Olympias 
is that the latter was not designed to carry a significant 
provision  of  water.  In  a  recent  paper  by  Sleeswyk  and 
Meijer  (1998),  it  is  shown  that  Greek  triremes,  when 
fully  provisioned,  most  likely  carried  some  8  tonnes  of 
water-filled jugs (kadoi), additional weight which would 
have required a stronger and heavier hull. 
vi) Strength of hull and hypozomata
To  anyone  familiar  with  the  carrying  capacity  of  the 
wooden  barque du Léman ,  a  type  of  ship  supposedly 
derived from the Venetian galley and which clearly shows 
such an ancestry, it may come as a surprise that there could 
be any problem in giving the hull of the ancient trireme 
sufficient strength. Fig. 15.7, taken from Pâris’ Souvenirs 
de Marine IV (Pâris 1888, no. 200), gives an outline of the 
hull of a barque of the nineteenth century, from which the 
similarity in shape to a galley hull is evident. It is recorded 
that the Vaudaire, another barque built in 1894, at 35 m 
in length and 50 tonnes hull displacement, could carry 
140 tonnes of building stone. These ships commonly lasted 
for about half a century (Guex 1975).
  If  giving  the  hull  sufficient  strength  is  perceived  as 
problematical, it seems logical to interpret the hypozomata 
which are mentioned in the classical literature as hogging 
trusses.  Yet  one  may  wonder  whether  there  really  was 
a  problem  and  whether,  in  any  case,  hypozomata  could 
have functioned as hogging trusses. The latter were often 
provided  on  Egyptian  ships,  as  is  shown  in  a  number 
of  depictions,  but  mostly  for  hulls  which  either  were 
constructed   as  a  patchwork   of  short  pieces  of  wood 
or  which  had  to  operate   under  circumstances   which 
were  unusual  for  Egypt,  such  as  at  sea  or  carrying  an 
exceptionally heavy load. 
  The diameter of 40 mm for hypozomata ropes which is 
deduced from the literature (Morrison and Williams 1968, 
296) seems rather paltry in comparison to the diameter of 
the ropes of the hogging trusses on the Egyptian ships. For 
comparative purposes, the diameter should be expressed as 
a fraction of the length of the ship, thus giving a ‘relative 
diameter’. As the trireme must have been similar in length 
to  Egyptian  ships,  this  type  of  comparison  should  not 
lead to gross errors, and there is no alternative approach 
available
  The force which can be exerted by the ropes will be 
proportional  to  their  cross-sectional  surface  area,  or  to 
the square of their diameter. The relative diameter of the 
ropes  of  hypozomata  of  40  mm  diameter  on  a  trireme 
36 to 40 m long is 1.0 to 1.1 × 10-3 of that length, and 
corresponding to this is the ‘relative cross-sectional area’, 
obtained by squaring the relative diameter and multiplying 
by π/4 to account for the circular cross-section. The total 
relative cross-sectional area for the four hypozomata ropes 
===== PAGE 131 =====
André Wegener Sleeswyk118
in a trireme (in fact, two ropes fitted doubled) works out 
at 3.1 to 3.7 × 10-6.
  We  can  compare  this  value  with  those  determined 
for  the  hogging  truss  and  for  the  roughly  horizontal 
‘undergirdings’ encompassing the hull under the gunwale 
of the sea-going ship of Sahure of c. 2500 BC (Fig. 15.8, 
from  Landstrom  1970)  (Borchardt  1913).  The  relative 
diameter   of  the  hogging   truss  on  that  ship  is  9.2  ×  
10-3, that of one of the undergirding ropes is 2.8 × 10-3. 
The corresponding relative cross-sectional areas are 66.5 
×10–6 for the hogging truss and 12.3 × 10-6 for the two 
undergirding ropes together. 
  Although both values are considerably in excess of the 
total  relative  cross-sectional  area  of  the  hypozomata  of 
the Greek trireme, clearly the latter compares far better 
with  the  relative  cross-sectional   area  of  the  Egyptian 
undergirdings   than   that   of  the  hogging   truss.   This 
finding suggests that it is more plausible to interpret the 
hypozomata as undergirdings than as hogging trusses.
  The above vindicates Casson’s conclusion regarding the 
long-standing  problem  of  the  functional  interpretation 
of the hypozomata, namely that they were undergirdings 
(Casson  1971,  91).  Moreover,  the  provision  of  cordone 
parallel  to  the  gunwale  around  the  hull  in  early  17th-
century Genoese galleys, allows us to postulate a historical 
process  in  which  the  Greek  hypozoma  is  regarded  as  an 
intermediary   stage  in  a  development   from  Egyptian 
undergirdings to the Genoese cordone, as explained in the 
author’s note on pp. 207–12 of this volume. 
vii) Position and depth of gangway
There  is  one  three-dimensional  depiction  of  an  ancient 
ship  showing  a  central  gangway,  the  marble  hull,  now 
in the Louvre museum, on which the statue of the Nike 
of Samothrace stands. The depth of the gangway in the 
monument is 60 cm, the width 73 cm. The hull is obviously 
shown on a reduced scale: if one considers the amount of 
room available for oarsmen’s bodies, the scale of the model 
is at most 1:1.5 (Sleeswyk 1982b), but if the subdivision 
of  the  Greek  foot  into  16  inches  is  taken  into  account 
as well, a scale of ⅝ or 1:1.6 seems more probable. The 
corresponding dimensions of the gangway in the real ship 
would then have been: depth 96 cm, width 117 cm.
  The military use of the gangway would have been at 
least three-fold:
a)  It would have provided protection for the legs and lower 
bodies of the marines when they were shooting arrows 
and throwing javelins in battle.
b)  It  would  have  prevented  these  men  from  being  flung 
into  the  water  when  the  ship  rammed  an  adversary. 
The canopy deck of Olympias does not offer bulwarks 
against which men could brace themselves sufficiently 
to  prevent   this  from  happening.   Conceivably,   the 
gangway  could  also  have  been  partitioned   by  ropes 
athwartships during battle, to prevent the fighting men 
from being flung forward over any large distance upon 
ramming. They would have stood on the canopy deck 
only when preparing to board an enemy ship during an 
engagement.
c)  It  would  have  offered  the  opportunity  for  the  javelin 
Figure 15.7. Longitudinal and transverse cross-sections of a barque du Léman, taken from Pâris 1888, no. 200.
===== PAGE 132 =====
15. Beyond Olympias: an outsider’s view 119
throwers  to  sit  on  deck  and  brace  their  legs  in  the 
gangway  when  throwing  their  javelins  from  a  seated 
position   (Thuc.   7.68.1).   Javelin-throwing   is  based 
mainly on a rapid twist of the upper body and pelvis (cf. 
Muybridge 1955, Pl. 48), requiring the legs to provide 
the necessary reactive forces. This would not have been 
possible  if  these  men  were  seated  on  a  flat  deck.  A 
kneeling position would then appear to be the minimum 
requirement, but that is not historically attested.
There does not seem to be an overriding reason to maintain 
Olympias’ dangerously deep gangway, which does not serve 
a  primarily  military  purpose.  Having  a  higher  gangway 
would remove a constraint from the arrangement of the 
oarsmen as well, because it would allow the thalamians 
to be seated not next to the gangway, as in Olympias, but 
under it, as explained in section 3 iv. 
5. Conclusions
The foregoing is certainly not an exhaustive list as regards 
the issues which should be considered when designing a 
new reconstruction. Others include: the shape and solidity 
of the epotides; the amount of ballast carried in the ship; 
the positioning of the main beams between the thalamians; 
etc. Nevertheless, a number of key points have been raised 
here, and the conclusions reached may now be summarised. 
Any new reconstruction should be more heavily built than 
Olympias, displacing about 35 tonnes when empty, with a 
length of approximately 40 m, a hull shape resembling that 
of the Renaissance galleys with a flaring U-shaped cross-
section, and a gangway situated at a higher level, above the 
heads of the thalamians. The thalamian oarports and their 
askomata are to be much smaller, in accordance with the 
iconography. The new design should aim at minimising 
the adverse effects of deceleration during ramming upon 
the crew. The hypozomata are not to be fitted as hogging 
trusses, but as girdling the hull under the gunwale, similar 
to the cordone in Genoese galleys of c. AD1600 and the 
undergirdings observed on some ancient Egyptian ships. 
These points should be considered in detail from both the 
historical and the technical viewpoints for incorporation 
into the design of any successor to Olympias. 
Acknowledgements
The author is greatly indebted to Professors F . J. A. M. 
Meijer and H. Th. Wallinga and to Dr. J. F . Coates for 
comments and discussion on a number of points raised 
in this paper.
Bibliography
Basch, L. (1987) Le musée imaginaire de la marine antique. 
Athens, Hellenic Institute for the Presevation of Nautical 
T radition. 
Baumeister, A.  (1888)  Denkmäler des klassischen Alterums , 
Bd.  I.  Munich  and  Leipzig,  Druck  und  Verlag von  R. 
Oldenbourg.
Borchardt, L. (1913) Das Grabdenkmal des Königs Sahu-re , 
Bd. II. Leipzig, J. C. Hinrichs.
Casson,  L.  and  Steffy  J.  R.  (eds.)  (1991)  The Athlit Ram . 
College Station TX, T exas A & M University Press. 
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (eds.) (1990) The 
Trireme Trials 1988. Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea Trials 
of Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Casson, L. (1971) Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. 
Princeton NJ, Princeton University Press.
Færøyvik, B.  and Ø. and Christensen, A.  E. (eds.)  (1979) 
Inshore Craft of Norway .  London,  Conway  Maritime 
Press.
Gardiner, S. and Morrison, J. (1995) The Age of the Galley. 
Mediterranean Oared Vessels since Pre-Classical Times. 
London, Conway Maritime Press.
Hale, J. R. (1996) The Lost T echnology of Ancient Greek 
Rowing. Scientific American 274, 66–71.
Lamb, H. (1879) Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of the 
Motion of Fluids ..  Cambridge,   Cambridge   University 
Press.
Landström, B. (1970) Die Schiffe der Pharaonen. München, 
Gütersloh, Bertelsmann.
Figure 15.8. Sea-going ship depicted in the tomb of Sahure, the second king of the Fifth Dynasty, 2510–2460 BC. (after 
Borchardt 1913, from Landström 1970). 
===== PAGE 133 =====
André Wegener Sleeswyk120
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1995)  Hellenistic  oared  warships  399–31 
BC. In Gardiner and Morrison 1995, 66–77.
Morrison J. S. and Coates, J. F . (eds) (1989) An Athenian T rireme 
Reconstructed. The British Sea Trials of Olympias,1987. 
BAR International Series 486. Oxford, Archaeopress.
Morrison, J. S. and Williams, R. T . (1968) Greek Oared Ships 
900–322 BC. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Morrison, J. S. and Coates, J. F ., and Rankov, N. B. (2000) 
The Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship.  2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  Cambridge 
University Press.
Murray, W . M. and Petsas, P . M. (1989) Octavian’s Campsite 
Memorial for the Actian War. Philadelphia, The American 
Philosophical Society.
Muybridge, E.  (1955)  The Human Figure in Motion .  New 
York, Dover Publications
Nicol,  D.  M.  (1988)  Byzantium and Venice: a Study in 
Diplomatic and Cultural Relations. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press. 
Pâris, F .-E. (1888) Souvenirs de Marine IV . Paris, Gauthier-
Villars.
Rankov, N. B. (1989) The scientific aims. In Morrison and 
Coates 1989, 61–66.
Shaw, J.  T . (ed.)  (1993a)  The Trireme Project. Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt. Oxbow Monograph 
31. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Shaw, J. T . (1993b) Rowing Olympias: further lessons of the 
sea trials. In Coates, Platis, and Shaw 1990, 58–68.
Sleeswyk, A. W . (1982a) A new reconstruction of the Attic 
trieres   and  bireme.   International Journal of Nautical 
Archaeology 11.1, 35–46.
Sleeswyk, A. W . (1982b) ‘The prow of the ‘Nike of Samothrace’ 
reconsidered’, International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 
11.3, 233–243.
Sleeswyk, A. W . (1996) Ramming trim of ships. In Tzalas, 
H. (ed.), Tropis IV . 4th International Symposium on Ship 
Construction in Antiquity, Athens 1991. Proceedings.  
Athens, Hellenic Institute for the Preservation of Nautical 
T radition, 429–49.
Sleeswyk,  A.  W.  (2001)  The  lineage  of  the  triacontor.  A 
verifiable  hypothesis.  In Tzalas, H  (ed.),  Tropis VI.  6th 
International Symposium on Ship Construction in Antiquity, 
Lamia, 1996. Proceedings . Athens, Hellenic Institute for 
the Preservation of Nautical T radition, 517–527.
Sleeswyk, A. W . and Meijer, F . (1998) The water supply of 
the Argo and other oared ships. The Mariner’s Mirror 84, 
131–138.
Steffy, J. R. (1983) The Athlit Ram: A preliminary Investigation 
of its Structure. The Mariner’s Mirror 69, 229–247.
T orr, C. (1904) ‘Navis’ in Ch. Daremberg and E. Saglio (eds.), 
Dictionnaire des antiquités grecques et romaines . Vol. IV: 
N–Q. Paris, Librairie Hachette et Cie., 24–40.
===== PAGE 134 =====
16.  An Unauthentic Reconstruction
The four papers circulated by members of the T rireme T rust 
for consideration at their Athenian T rireme conference (see 
pp. 63–91) dealt mainly with performance under oars. 
  Timothy Shaw suggested that in an ancient trireme the 
whole crew rowed for 16 to 17 hours at 7 to 8 knots to 
cover 129 miles in a day. Some readers will consider, as 
I do, that 16 to 17 hours as a man’s rowing day with ‘no 
indication of haste’ (Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 
103) is preposterously too long. 
  Dr Coates said in his paper that the first aim of any 
future   reconstruction   would   be  ‘To  achieve   attested 
performance under oar’. It is difficult to believe that his 
trireme’s crew could ever be asked to row for 16 or 17 
hours. I do not believe that a rower in Dr Coates’ projected 
ship could even go through the motions of rowing for 16 
hours, irrespective of the distance covered. No doubt much 
the same ‘trials’ philosophy will be adopted as before:
‘A test lasting one hour seems too long to be practical, but 
one of six minutes would be convenient and on average 
equivalent to the longer one, because if a man can deliver 
230 watts for 6 minutes with no need to resume, he can 
probably  deliver  160  watts  for  one  hour  and,  after  30 
minutes  rest,  do  it  again  for  another  hour,  and  so  on’ 
(Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 15).
And again and again and again. It is unclear how the 30-
minute rests could be fitted in, since the calculations are 
based on the full crew rowing. A six-minute test might 
convince the faithful of a 129-mile day, but would not 
impress the sceptic. As Dr Coates has rightly pointed out, 
performance alone is not a sufficient test of authenticity. 
  The main aim of this paper is to show that the proposed 
new design is, like the Olympias, at variance with almost all 
the evidence concerning ancient triremes. Unfortunately, 
conformity with ancient evidence is not widely accepted 
as a requirement where ‘reconstructions’ of ancient ships 
are concerned, and is not included among the aims of the 
trireme project listed in Dr Coates’s conference paper (p. 
82). The subject is discussed in Annex 1. The conference 
ought to have taken cognisance of each item of evidence, 
if only to discount it, but it did not. 
Alec Tilley
  Although my views on triremes differ fundamentally 
from  those  of  the  T rireme  T rust,  there  has  been  some 
convergence in recent years, and in order to strike an early 
positive note that topic is covered in Annex 2. 
Linguistic evidence
There  are  six  oarsmen  in  nearly  every  cross-section  of 
the proposed design, whereas there is evidence that the 
number in the name of ancient warships referred to the 
number of oarsmen in cross-section. Thus the eponymous 
trieres,  with  a  name  incorporating   the  number  three, 
would have had three oarsmen, not six, in cross-section. 
The  linguistic  evidence  (summarised  in  Annex  3)  that 
supports my contention ought to have been discussed at 
the conference. 
Iconographic evidence
The  proposed  new  design,  like  the  Olympias,  has  oars 
pivoted at three distinct levels. In that it is strikingly unlike 
any ship representation made before the introduction of 
warships named after the number six. 
  Professor  Morrison’s  explanation  of  this  discrepancy 
is that a trireme’s oars were arranged in such a manner 
that ancient artists found them too difficult to attempt to 
draw: 
‘It seems likely that the ship had become so complicated 
a  subject  to  depict,  with  its  three  banks  [Anglice  three 
levels] of oars and the problems of perspective which these, 
as  well  as  the  outrigger  supports  and  deck  stanchions, 
presented, that artists in general had been avoiding the 
task’ (Morrison and Williams 1968, 169).
What Morrison sees as likely seems highly unlikely to me, 
especially in view of the ease with which modern artists 
and even school children draw the Olympias, producing 
representations   that  clearly  show  three  levels  of  oars. 
Surely, if Athenian shipwrights could build them and the 
citizens  row  them  with  such  success,  their  artists  could 
depict them? 
===== PAGE 135 =====
Alec Tilley122
  Dr  Coates’  new  design  is  no  more  likely  than  the 
Olympias to meet the too-difficult-to-draw requirement, 
and  it  differs  even  more  than  the  Olympias  from  the 
Lenormant Relief in that the oarsmen are skewed outboard, 
so that viewed from abeam their arms overlap the oarsman 
next aft. It is unclear whether or not the Lenormant Relief 
will be cited in support of the new design, but it would be 
prudent to carry out trials (by offering professional artists 
their usual fee to draw a mock-up of the new design and 
noting the proportion of those who refused on the grounds 
that the task was too difficult) before going ahead with 
construction. 
Pseudo-evidence
To  make  up  for  the  absence  of  three-level  ships  in  the 
iconography, representations which do not show oars at 
three levels are often put forward as pseudo-evidence for 
three-level triremes, by adding supposed paint of which 
there  is  now  no  trace,  or  ‘correcting’  supposed  artistic 
errors, or by assuming three-level originals of which the 
actual work of art is supposed to be an inaccurate copy 
by  an  ignorant  artist.  The  technique  is  examined  and 
deplored in Annex 4.  
Three-level ships
There  are  representations   dating  from  Hellenistic  and 
Roman times, when warships named after the numbers six 
and higher were in service, which undoubtedly show oars 
at three levels. These have, from time to time, been put 
forward irrationally as evidence for three-level triremes. 
  Torr  (1895,  466)  and  Dr  Papalas  in  his  conference 
paper (see pp. 101–8), cited three-level ships on T rajan’s 
column as evidence for three-level triremes, so assuming 
what they were trying to prove. 
  Professor   Morrison   deployed   the  same   fallacious 
argument in connexion with a clay model which shows 
oars at three levels: 
‘This model of a trieres has been included to confirm the 
theory,  if  further  proof  be  needed,  that  the  trieres  was 
propelled  by  three  banks  of  oars  [Anglice  oars  at  three 
levels]’ (Morrison and Williams 1968, 180).
yet there is no reason to believe that the ship the artist 
had  in  mind  had  only  six  oarsmen  in  cross-section  or 
that  it  was  called  a  trireme.  The  model,  bought  in  an 
Egyptian bazaar in the nineteenth century, and with no 
archaeological provenance, is described as Hellenistic. In 
Hellenistic  times  there  were  warships  named  after  the 
number six, and higher numbers too. If representations of 
oars at three levels were made without difficulty in the era 
of the ‘six’ but not before, it is evidence that the three-level 
ships were ‘sixes’ or above, not triremes. 
  Morrison (1979, 55) seems to have accepted the logic 
of  this,  and  has  silently  revised  his  assessment  of  the 
model to that of a polyreme. It shows a striking inability 
to distinguish opinion from evidence. 
  Essentially the same fallacy has recently been revived 
by  Höckmann  (1997,  196).  Because  they  have  oars  at 
three levels, he writes of some 1st-century BC depictions 
of ships: ‘This makes the vessels triremes ...’
Three classes of oarsmen
Before the Olympias, the ancient evidence that the three 
classes  of  oarsmen  in  a  trireme  sat  forward,  amidships 
and aft was generally accepted, the thranites furthest aft 
and the thalamians furthest forward (Morrison 1941, 20). 
The original arrangement in the Olympias could, with a 
measure of goodwill, be said to conform. The three classes 
were  assigned  to  the  three  levels,  the  thalamians  at  the 
bottom. On either side, three rowers, one from each level, 
were regarded as a ‘triad’, the uppermost furthest aft and 
the lowest furthest forward. But it was found impossible 
to keep time with that arrangement, and the triads were 
reformed with the thalamians furthest aft, where they could 
be seen by the others of the triad. This discrepancy with 
the ancient evidence was never remarked upon, and the 
fore-and-aft evidence is no longer mentioned in T rireme 
T rust literature. 
  It was not made clear at the conference whether or not 
the new design is intended to conform with this evidence, 
but as Dr Coates said he was not aware of it, presumably 
the new design ignores it. 
  There is evidence against seating the thalamians below 
the  other  oarsmen,  in  the  hold,  where  they  are  in  the 
Olympias and where they will be in the new design. The 
hold is hotter and airless compared with the upper levels, 
so  that  when  the  thalamians  alone  row  the  Olympias 
they generally (and understandably) change places with 
the rowers of a higher level. But that did not happen in 
antiquity.  When  ancient  thalamians  rowed  alone  they 
stayed  in  their  usual  places  unless  intending  to  deceive 
the  enemy   (Polyaenus   Strat. 5.222.4,   cited   in  Tarn 
1906). It indicates that ancient thalamians did not sit as 
they do in the Olympias and will in the new design. The 
T rireme  T rust’s  views  on  this  were  not  revealed  at  the 
conference. 
  The arrangement in the Olympias is sometimes justified 
with the assumption that the ancient Greek thalamos meant 
a ship’s hold, and that the name for one group of a trireme’s 
oarsmen was derived from it. But thalamos did not mean 
a hold, it meant a cabin, as Casson (1995, 401, citing the 
evidence on pp. 180–1) defines it. A thalamegos literally 
‘cabin carrier’ was a vessel with a cabin, not a vessel with 
a  hold  (Casson  1995,  341–342;  Höckmann  1993,  133 
and fig 6.2). Modern Greeks use the word thalamos for a 
telephone kiosk, with no suggestion of anything that is, 
like a hold, down below. 
  Whatever  the  seating  plan,  the  three  designations, 
thalamian,  zygian  and  thranite,  implied  a  difference  in 
rank, something like Ordinary Seaman, Able Seaman and 
Leading Seaman. In Dr Coates’ new design, the maximum 
allowable stature of the oarcrew varies: The thranites can 
be 1.88m (6' 2") tall, but the thalamians no more than 
===== PAGE 136 =====
16. An Unauthentic Reconstruction 123
1.75m (5' 9"). It is difficult to see how tall veterans could 
have been produced from short recruits, unless the recruits 
were less than full-grown, and that seems unlikely. 
  Moreover, a rank structure based on the seating plan 
of a three-level ship would not have been convenient in 
the course of changing over to the tetreres, a type of ship 
which did not have oarsmen at three levels. Better to have 
the arrangement, forward, midships and aft, which suits 
any ship. 
  Furthermore   it  would   not  have  been  sensible   to 
put  inexperienced  recruits  in  every  room,  where  their 
shortcomings, such as ‘catching crabs’ and getting out of 
time, would have impeded the more expert. Better to have 
them grouped separately. 
  The fact that the Athenian trireme used three types of 
oar has sometimes been put forward as evidence for oars 
at three levels, but Dr Coates’ new design does not require 
different types of oar for his different levels. The question 
of how the oars did differ is addressed in Annex 5. 
  Early Greek warships typically had a raised fore-deck, 
and  beneath  it  the  only  enclosed  space  that  could  be 
called a cabin. Locating the thranite oarsmen aft, nearest 
the threnos, the heavy beam across the ship’s stern, which 
Morrison suggests may have given its name to the thranites 
(Morrison and Williams 1948, 49), and the thalamians 
forward,   nearest   the  thalamos   in  the  bows,  gives  an 
eminently practical arrangement that conforms with the 
ancient evidence, does not require recruits shorter than 
veterans,  and  is  suitable  for  any  type  of  ship.  Had  this 
aspect been considered at the conference, it might have 
been possible to reach agreement without renouncing faith 
in three-level triremes. 
Passenger capacity
It  is  clear  from  the  account  by  Herodotus  of  Persians 
jumping overboard from Xerxes’ trireme to save the ship in 
heavy weather, that there was little or no room below the 
deck for any but the rowing crew. Morrison concludes:
‘  ...  while  there  may  have  been  a  small  cabin  for  the 
trierarch and an important passenger, there was no room 
elsewhere below decks for anyone else’ (Morrison, Coates 
and Rankov 2000, 131). 
This evidence was apparently disregarded in the design of 
the Olympias, where (I would estimate) there is room for 
at least 60 men. If there is any significant disagreement 
about it, trials could easily be carried out. 
  The new design seems to have the same unauthentic 
capacity. Below the deck there is a gangway about a metre 
wide running most of the length of the ship. Dr Coates 
insists on a gangway, citing the opinion of ‘most if not 
all rowers in Olympias’ that things would be impractical 
without  it,  thus  seeking  to  overrule  ancient  evidence 
with modern opinion. The conference did not attempt to 
reconcile the proposed gangway with the accepted evidence 
of lack of space below the deck. 
  The only wreck so far to throw light on ancient warships’ 
rowing arrangements, the 30-oared warship described by 
Olaf  Höckmann  (1993,  fig.  6),  has  15  double-banked 
rooms and no gangway. 
The number of places for oarsmen in a trireme
The T rireme T rust assume that in the evolution of ancient 
warships there was a single jump from ships with places for 
50 oarsmen to those with 170. In putting that proposition, 
Dr  Coates  admits  that  it  is  ‘astonishing’,  but  hopes  it 
is  ‘something  that  historians  may  one  day  be  able  to 
illuminate for us’ (Shaw 1993, 23). Illumination day did 
not arrive in time for the conference. I think Dr Coates’ 
proposition is incredible rather than just astonishing and 
that no evidence will ever be discovered to explain it. 
  The Decree of Themistocles, mobilising the Athenian 
navy in 480 BC, ordered 100 oarsmen to each trireme. My 
hypothesis that pre-Cimon Athenian triremes had places 
for 90 oarsmen accords with it well. To conscript ten extra 
men to allow for evasion and unfitness was prudent. But 
it is difficult to reconcile Dr Coates’ notion of a trireme 
with seating for 170 oarsmen with the decree. Even if it 
is assumed that no more than 100 oarsmen per trireme 
were available, it is hard to see why the Athenians should 
have built, only shortly before the decree, a great many 
more triremes than they could fully man. 
  It is not just a question of evolution. It is unlikely that 
at any one time an admiral had at his disposal nothing 
between a 50 and a 170. It would have been extravagant to 
send a 170 to hunt down a 50. Cost-effectiveness requires 
a finer graduation. 
  When they were used as transports, triremes retained 
60  oars.   Professor   Morrison   has  calculated   that  the 
troop-carryings   triremes  that  sailed  from  Corcyra  on 
the  expedition  to  Sicily  each  took  about  72  soldiers  as 
passengers (Morrison and Williams 1968, 248), basing his 
calculation on the overall numbers, not on the details of 
the ships. Seventy-two is far too few for a vessel like the 
Olympias. With seating for 170 but only 60 oarsmen, the 
Olympias would have 110 oarsmen’s places available for 
soldiers. In addition, like an ancient trireme, it could go to 
sea with at least a further 14 soldiers on deck, making 124 
in all. The gangway of the Olympias and of the new design 
have  room  for  many  more  men.  Clearly,  the  Olympias 
and the new design seat too many oarsmen (and have far 
too much space below the deck) to resemble an ancient 
trireme. The T rireme T rust has always refused to address 
this discrepancy, and did not do so at the conference. 
The Weight of an Athenian trireme
An Athenian decree required 140 men to get a trireme up 
a slipway and 120 to get her down. Those figures suggest 
that  the  trireme  was  lifted  rather  than  dragged.  Coates 
and Shaw calculate that if the trireme had been dragged, 
it would have taken three times as many men to drag it 
up as to drag it down a likely slipway, the numbers for the 
weight of the Olympias being 110 and 37 respectively (the 
figure that should be 37, as cited here, was confusingly 
===== PAGE 137 =====
Alec Tilley124
misprinted ‘48’ in the reference) (Shaw 1993, 87). But 
Coates and Shaw make the astonishing assertion that the 
ratio  three-to-one  fits  the  decreed  140  and  120  ‘fairly 
well’. It is surely essential for the T rust to dissociate itself 
from Coates-and-Shaw mathematics if its estimates and 
calculations are to be respected, but it did not do so at 
the conference. Looked at rationally, the evidence suggests 
that it ought to be possible for 140 men to lift the new 
design and walk her up a one-in-ten hill. 
  Professor Casson (1995, 89) likened an ancient warship 
to ‘an overgrown racing shell’ and drew attention to the 
evidence  that  triremes  were  ‘drawn  up  by  their  crews 
on  the  beach  at  night’  and  hauled  overland  more  than 
two miles in a day. To put the Olympias ashore requires 
heavy machinery and the expense that goes with it. She 
has therefore been kept afloat, and shipworms have eaten 
enough of her to put her out of service. Ancient triremes 
spent  most  of  their  lives  ashore,  carried  there  by  their 
crews. That is why so many of them lasted a remarkably 
long time. 
  By allowing a lift of only 50 kilos a man, Coates and 
Shaw have persuaded themselves that an ancient trireme 
could  not  have  been  lifted  even  by  140  men,  but  the 
estimate of 50 kilos is ridiculously low. Almost any man 
fit for military service today can carry twice that on his 
shoulders, and strong men manage 300 kilos. Men who 
regularly  rowed  some  17  hours  a  day,  and  covered  129 
miles ‘with no indication of haste’ (Morrison, Coates and 
Rankov  2000,  103)  were  probably  quite  strong.  T rials 
would help to resolve the matter. 
  If  the  estimate  of  50  kilos  is  accepted  and  made  a 
requirement, it will be difficult to recruit rowers for the 
new  design,  let  alone  approach  the  performance  of  a 
trireme. People puny enough to match the Coates-and-
Shaw estimate are not likely to be interested in a hearty 
occupation like rowing. 
The height of an Athenian trireme
The largest ship in Anthony’s fleet at Actium was a dekeres, 
a polyreme named after the number ten, and its height 
of  ten  feet  above  the  water  was  considered  remarkably 
imposing (Tarn 1905, 171). The deck of Dr Coates’ new 
design is nearly as high. One would expect a trireme to be 
a good deal lower. An examination of rowing arrangements 
confirms it. 
  In  the  Olympias   it  was  found   that  ‘Even  though 
the  biggest  and  strongest  rowers  occupied  the  thranite 
[uppermost] level they still found it very hard work. The 
steep angle of the oar made pulling it awkward. At the 
finish hands were high, making it difficult to apply the 
downward force necessary to recover the blade’ (Morrison 
and Coates 1989, 40). 
  Figures 14 and 15 in the same trials report (Morrison 
and Coates 1989, 33) add weight to those words. To my 
mind,  no  one  could  row  efficiently  like  that,  still  less 
keep it up for a 16 or 17 hour day. In the new design, it 
appears that the uppermost rowers will be higher still, and 
the angle of the oars correspondingly steeper. I conclude 
that the new design is too high. 
  In a study of early modern galleys, Dr Coates (1993, 
4)  points  out  that  the  shaft  length  of  their  oars  must 
generally have been proportional to the height of the thole 
above water: ‘length of oar and freeboard were critically 
related’. The opposite is true of the new design, where the 
oars are of the same length at all levels. The discrepancy 
suggests that it is a fundamental error to have rowers at 
markedly different levels if the oars in nearly every room 
are to be all of the same length. In early modern galleys the 
importance of avoiding too steep an angle was apparently 
considered so important that ‘longer oars were supplied 
temporarily to newly-built galleys for use at each end of 
their oar systems until the hulls had hogged sufficiently 
to allow regular oars to work properly’. There is a clear 
implication that oars at too steep an angle will not work 
properly. 
  In early modern galleys the slope of the oars on the 
working stroke ‘appears to have lain for centuries within 
a narrow range around 15°’ (Coates 1993, 4). To achieve 
that, the shortest oars of their six-man-cross-section galleys 
were  more  than  twice  as  long  as  the  Athenian  trireme 
lengths. In the new design, the slope of the uppermost 
oars is more than twice as steep: about 32°. The oars at the 
middle level are also too steep at about 22°. Clearly, the 
new design is unsuited to the oar lengths used in Athenian 
triremes. 
T owing
In  the  opinion  of  at  least  one  member  of  the T rireme 
T rust, an ancient trireme would not have been able to tow 
a bulky cargo vessel for a usefully-long period ‘even in a 
calm’ (Roberts 1995, 314). It is clear from the context that 
Roberts had in mind lack of oar-power or endurance, not 
for example very weak tow ropes, because he adds that 
Demosthenes’ account (cited in Morrison and Williams 
1968,  245)  of  triremes  towing  grain  ships  for  50  miles 
‘shows no experience of the stamina needed to row a galley’. 
The T rust should, I think, dissociate itself from Roberts’ 
opinion, though it did not do so at the conference. If lack 
of oar power for towing is accepted as a requirement for 
the new design, it will make it harder to come anywhere 
near the 129 miles a day normally expected of triremes. 
Lack of evidence for three levels
In  his  second  paper  Shaw  asserts  that  ‘there  is  massive 
evidence ... that an ancient trireme’s hull and the main 
principles  of  her  oarsystem  were  very  like  those  of  the 
Olympias and Plan 201–12’ [the new design] (p. 68), but 
he does not say what it is. Morrison wrote: ‘The written 
evidence for this type [the trireme] suggests that it was 
rowed  by  oarsmen  at  three  levels’  and  also  omitted  to 
specify it (Morrison and Williams 1968, 169). In his paper 
===== PAGE 138 =====
16. An Unauthentic Reconstruction 125
for the conference (pp. 101–8), Dr Papalas made a similar 
evidence-free  assertion.  The  great  bulk  of  the  literature 
advocating three-level triremes consists of explanations for 
the lack of evidence (three-level ships were too difficult 
to  draw);  or  beating  down  the  evidence  (philosophers 
were inexact); or concocting pseudo-evidence by adding 
imaginary rows of oars to monuments that show less than 
three (my Annex 4); or fallaciously advancing Hellenistic 
and  Roman  depictions  of  three-level  ships  as  evidence 
of  three-level  triremes;  or  counting  on  evidence  which 
historians may one day be able to discover (Shaw 1993, 
23). 
  There remains the argument that:
‘A passage in the Frogs of Aristophanes (405 BC) implies 
that the thalamite oarsman sits behind and below at least 
one of the other two, since it speaks of someone “making 
wind in the face of the thalamite”’ Morrison 1941, 20). 
Morrison’s  inference  rests  on  the  assumption  that  the 
incident  occurs  while  the  oarsmen  are  aboard  ship  in 
their  rowing  positions,   but  it  is  more  likely  to  have 
happened on shore. It is associated with a call for rations, 
and  a  trireme’s  crew  rarely  ate  onboard  (Morrison  and 
Williams 1968, 269). In any case, there is no suggestion 
in Aristophanes that the disagreeable habit was indulged in 
only by the zygian oarsmen. Even if it is insisted that the 
practice took place onboard a trireme, the superior classes 
of oarsmen could have annoyed the thalamians (who sat 
furthest forward in the ship according to the once-accepted 
evidence) on their way forward to the heads. 
The way ahead
I suggest that instead of building a new three-level, six-
banked ship, the T rireme T rust should first study the 25-
benched,  double-banked  pentekontor.  Almost  everyone 
believes in such a pentekontor – very few supporters of a 
later, two-level pentekontor (with either 50 or 100 oars) 
dispute a preceding, double-banked version. 
  The  advantage  of  such  an  approach  is  that  with  the 
basic configuration not in dispute, one could concentrate 
on  aspects  other  than  how  to  arrange  the  oars. T wo  of 
the most important factors that would have affected the 
performance of any oared warship are:
1.   How much was sacrificed in the interests of performance? 
What   was   the   compromise   between   speed   and 
seaworthiness?
2.   Did the oarsmen’s cushions provide the equivalent of a 
sliding seat? 
By contrast, it is difficult in the trireme controversy, by 
long tradition acerbic, to get beyond disputing the number 
of banks, levels and oarsmen.
  It  would  be  interesting  to  see  how  much  agreement 
could  be  reached  on  the  fastest   possible   25-benched 
pentekontor. How light and narrow could it be without 
being impossibly unseaworthy? I leave open the question 
of  what  degree   of  ‘reconstruction’   would  be  needed 
– calculation, tank-testing of a model, mock-ups or a full-
sized floating vessel. If no agreement could be reached, in 
respect of a pentekontor, on the two questions posed above, 
it would at least suggest that similar efforts in respect of a 
trireme would continue to be fruitless. 
  But  given  an  agreed  pentekontor  hull,  (whether  the 
‘hull’ existed in a computer, as a scale model or as a full-
sized  floating  vessel)  it  would  take  little  extra  effort  to 
assess  the  effect  of  adding  an  outrigger  and  rowing  30 
benches, triple-banked, Siren-Vase-fashion. That is the sort 
of ship I have put forward as a pre-Cimon trireme, but it 
is important to emphasise that there need be no consensus 
on what to call it. Casson calls the arrangement moneres 
on the grounds that all the oarsmen are at one level, and 
Morrison  used  to  call  it  hemiolia,  on  the  grounds  that 
there are one-and-a-half oarsmen each bench each side. 
Believers in six-banked triremes need have no difficulty in 
accepting a three-banked ship (provided it is not a trireme) 
on the evolutionary road between two banks and six. At 
the conference Dr Coates said that he had no objection 
to the idea that the Siren Vase shows a vessel with three 
oarsmen to a bench, and no one expressed dissent. 
  A small modification, such as Cimon’s widening of the 
triremes that fought at Salamis, would allow the ship to 
be rowed with four men to a bench, the extra oarsman 
having  his  own  oar.  Dr  Coates’asserts  that  such  a  ship 
would not have retained the designation (trireme) that was 
appropriate when it was built, and would not have been 
as fast as his new 170-oared design, but neither of those 
assertions (which I dispute in my Annex 6) are relevant 
provided the vessel I have in mind is not called a trireme. 
It could be a bireme to some, and a moneres to those, like 
Casson, who go by the number of levels, irrespective of 
oarsmen.
  Another small modification to the ship, and perhaps 
different oars, and one would have a ship with two two-
man  oars  on  each  bench,  which  I  would  call  a 
tetreres 
and  others  could  again  call  a  bireme  –  or  yet  another 
moneres. 
Waiting for wrecks
It is sometimes suggested that we are all wasting our time 
discussing ancient warships while there are so few remains, 
and that we should wait for more wrecks to be excavated. 
An argument against that point of view is at Annex 8. 
A riddle
To close this paper, I ask a riddle:
T wenty, Thirty, Fifty, One-hundred-and-seventy.
What is the missing number?
What has it to do with ancient ships?
===== PAGE 139 =====
Alec Tilley126
Annex 1
Differing attitudes to ancient evidence
The idea that an attempted reconstruction should follow 
the ancient evidence is axiomatic in many fields, but not 
in  the  study  of  ancient  ships.  Lucien  Basch  considered 
that:
‘In the case of every ship representation, whether painted 
or  carved,   irrespective   of  whatever   period  it  may  be 
referreing to ... error is always to be assumed unless the 
contrary is proved’ [italics in the original] (Basch in Gilmer 
1985, 413). 
Since it is impossible to prove that an ancient represent-
ation  of  a  ship  is  not  in  error,  M.  Basch  invites   us 
into  a  looking-glass   world  where  the  more  closely   a 
hypothesis  agrees  with  iconographic  evidence,  and  the 
more  iconographic  evidence  there  is,  the  stronger  the 
presumption that the hypothesis is wrong. This paper is 
based on the opposite assumption – that there is merit in 
a hypothesis which conforms with ancient representations, 
even though there is no proof of their accuracy. 
  Dr Coates (1995) shows a similar disdain for evidence. 
In  disputing  the  arrangements  of  oars  put  forward  in 
Tilley (1992), he does not deny that they conform with 
the ancient written and iconographic evidence, but claims 
only  that  they  fail  to  accord  with  ‘generally  accepted 
interpretations of ancient evidence’.
  An examination of the so-called Vienna fragment of an 
Attic red-figure cup (Morrison and Willians 1968, 176, 
clas. 3 and plate 26b; Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 
149, fig. 43) will show the important distinction between 
interpretation  and  evidence,  and  the  way  in  which  Dr 
Coates ‘improves’ ancient evidence that does not suit his 
notions. His interpretation (perhaps one of the ‘generally 
accepted interpretations’ he alludes to) is of oars arranged 
as in the Olympias. The Olympias’s uppermost level of oars 
is suggested to him by a line of thole pins which through 
‘rough  drawing’  (Morrison,  Coates  and  Rankov  2000, 
148)  the  artist  has  neglected  to  depict.  He  interprets 
the lower-level oarport as a large, circular, Olympias-type 
oarport, transmuted by the same ‘rough drawing’ into the 
equal-sized, semi-circular oarport that we can actually see. 
Thus the interpretation is amazingly like the Olympias and 
thus the study of iconography is reduced from science to 
crystal gazing. 
  If  on  the  other  hand  one  works  directly  from  the 
evidence, ignoring interpretation, one can see three equal-
sized,  semi-circular  oarports,  arranged  in  a  way  that  is 
suitable for rowing triple-banked (Tilley 1992, figs 6, 7 
and 8). Arguments based on evidence and arguments based 
on interpretation are very different things, as different as 
astronomy from astrology, and often reach diametrically 
opposite conclusions. 
  Professor Morrison has extended the doctrine of artistic 
error to cover ancient literature. Because the arrangement 
in  the  Oympias   does  not  agree  with  the  evidence   of 
‘Aristotle’ and Galen, he concludes:
‘We may suppose that ‘Aristotle’ and Galen were guilty of 
unwise generalisation, a fault of philosophers’ (Morrison 
in Shaw 1993, 19) 
Freed from the constraints of iconographic evidence by 
M. Basch’s doctrine and from the constraints of written 
evidence   by  Professor  Morrison’s,  every  hypothesis   is 
invincible, and one writer very rarely convinces another. If, 
on the other hand, one accepts the limited aim (one that 
is almost universally adopted in scientific fields) of finding 
hypotheses  that  conform  with  the  evidence,  consensus 
becomes a distinct possibility. 
Annex 2
Convergence
A good deal of this paper is diametrically opposed to the 
published views of Professor Morrison and other members 
of the T rireme T rust; but since the publication of Greek 
Oared Ships in 1968, I am glad to see that our views have 
converged  in  quite  a  number  of  ways,  and  I  hope  may 
continue to converge in future.
  First, Professor Morrison came to agree that the well 
known  eighth-century   wall  relief  from  the  Palace  of 
Sennacherib, showing Phoenician warships with oars at 
two levels, is a trireme, an opinion I have long maintained 
and he has long resisted. I see it as a triple-banked trireme, 
fully  manned,  whereas  Professor  Morrison  sees  it  as  a 
three-level ship with the uppermost level unmanned, but 
his new opinion is still important. 
  In Greek Oared Ships , his mistranslation had made it 
appear that Thucydides described the Corinthians as the 
first absolutely to build triremes, rather than the first of 
the Greeks. Moreover, by suggesting that when Thucydides 
wrote naus he did not mean trieres, and later by supposing 
that Thucydides had his dates wrong, he was able to put 
forward a later date for the invention of triremes, which 
would have invalidated my own identification of two-level 
ships as triremes.
  The important innovation, though, was that Professor 
Morrison no longer militated against the opinion generally 
held outside the trireme controversy, that triremes were 
invented by Phoenicians in the eighth century. That gives 
us a common and early starting point from which to begin 
the search for triremes in iconography, and lengthens the 
period  for  which  the  lack  of  three-level  representations 
has to be explained. 
  Next,  the  T rireme  T rust’s  new  design  no  longer  has 
differently  shaped  oars  at  different  levels.  That  nullifies 
the argument that the Athenian trireme’s three types of 
oar indicated oars at three levels. (Annex 6 gives my views 
on the three types of oar). 
  The idea of thirty rooms for the new design is contained 
in Dr Coates’s paper on page 88, though at the conference 
Dr Coates said that he was not aware of this aspect. I have 
always maintained that thirty rooms is the right number 
for a trireme. The  Olympias had thirty-one. Apart from 
a small but useful easing of the problem of conforming 
===== PAGE 140 =====
16. An Unauthentic Reconstruction 127
with the length of the ship-sheds, a thirty-roomed design 
discards  the  earlier  idea  that  the  numbers  and  types  of 
oar in the naval lists should dictate the configuration of a 
trireme reconstruction. 
  At  the  conference,  Dr  Coates  said  that  he  had  no 
objection to the idea that the Siren Vase shows a vessel 
with  three  oarsmen  on  each  bench,  and  no  one  at  the 
conference dissented. This is an important development, as 
no member of the T rireme T rust has publicly accepted any 
form of triple-banked ship until now, and some members 
have published lampoons of the idea. If one took notice 
of the linguistic evidence in Annex 3 (which the T rireme 
T rust do not) it would be hard to avoid the conclusion 
that  Athenian  triremes  originally  had  three  oarsmen  in 
cross-section. 
  Finally, the idea that ancient oarsmen turned round to 
face the bow in order to pull their ships astern (Tilley and 
Fenwick  1973),  long  resisted  by  Morrison  and  Coates, 
has been publicly accepted by Shaw (1993, 69–70), and 
privately  by  Dr  Coates  on  behalf  of  the T rireme T rust. 
This will be of some value in the operating of the new 
design.  But  its  greatest  significance  is  that  it  upgrades 
the  assessment   of  at  least  six  ancient   representations 
of  ships,  from  erroneous  or  whimsical  to  accurate  and 
knowledgeable. Differing ideas as to the merit of ancient 
ship  representations   are  perhaps   the  greatest   of  the 
many  obstacles  to  reaching  consensus  in  ancient  ships 
disputes. 
Annex 3
Linguistic evidence
The written and linguistic evidence suggests that ancient 
Greeks and Romans used the same nomenclature as current 
English,  Italian,  Greek  and  other  European  languages, 
in that the number in the name of a rowing system or 
oared ship indicated the number of men in cross-section: 
to them a bireme meant a double-banked boat, a trireme 
was originally triple banked and so on. 
  Everyone agrees that when the Greeks described ships 
such as pentekontors they counted the oarsmen on both 
sides, yet advocates of six-banked triremes choose to assume 
that when they described a ship by its cross-section, they 
counted the oarsmen on only one side. The discrepancy 
is  generally  ignored,  and  it  ought  not  to  be.  Linguistic 
questions  such  as  this  have  general,  not  only  nautical, 
implications.Would Dr Coates be able to persuade us to 
describe a cow as bipedal on the grounds that it has two 
legs on either side? Who would dare argue that ancient 
tridents had six prongs or that quadrigas were pulled by 
eight horses?
  Consider single-banked rowing. If the ancient trireme, 
named after the number three, had six oarsmen in cross-
section, then boats with a single line of oarsmen would 
have been named for the number ‘a half’ – zero decimal 
five. But there is no such rowing word in ancient Greek 
or Latin. The lowest number used to described a rowing 
system is ‘one’: which suggests that the ancients used the 
same nomenclature as we do. It should be remembered that 
the Greek language is far older than complicated rowing 
systems. For many centuries, ancient Greek seamen, like 
the seamen of my youth, had only to distinguish a system 
with one man per bench from a system with two. In that 
simple era, before oars at different levels had been thought 
of, it is surely very unlikely that they would have called 
a boat with two men on a bench after the number ‘one’ 
on the grounds that they were, like all other oarsmen of 
the time, all at the same level; nor would they, I assert, 
have called a boat with a single line of oarsmen a ‘halfer’, 
on the grounds that there was half an oarsman on each 
bench either side. I would be glad to know if there is any 
modern language that does use the system I disparage. 
  Advocates   of  three-level   triremes   always   treat  the 
ancient Greek dikrotos as though it meant ‘four-banked’ 
or ‘two level’, which they often confusingly miscall ‘double 
banked’;  whereas  the  modern  Greek  diplokopos means 
‘double banked’. Similarly, they translate the Latin ordo as 
though it implied a row of oarsmen on each side, whereas 
the Italian doppio ordine di reme refers to double-banked, 
not four-banked, boats. 
  A Latin poet, Manilius, wrote about a man swimming:
‘nunc alterna ferens in lentos bracchia tractus ... nunc 
aequore mersas/ diducet palmas furtiva biremis in ipso ’ 
(Astronomicon 5.423–6) 
which Goold translates:
‘Now lifting one arm after the other to make slow sweeps 
... now like a hidden bireme he will draw apart his arms 
beneath the water’. 
The  first  swimming  action  is  the  crawl  and  the  second 
is the breast stroke. Assuming that a Roman of the time 
had  only  the  two  arms  considered  normal  today,  the 
man’s arms swimming breast stroke were like the oars of 
a double-banked boat. They would have given Manilius 
no impression of a vessel with oars at two levels. At the 
conference  it  was  pointed  out  that  Manilius  was  only 
a  minor  poet,  and  that  a  swimmer  has  legs  as  well  as 
arms, but neither observation seems to me to reduce the 
importance of the quotation as evidence for double-banked 
(as opposed to two-level) biremes.
  The Greek word  dieres, combining the ideas of ‘two’ 
and ‘rowing’, is absent from literature until the Roman 
period. If it was applied by the ancient Greeks to two-level 
ships, the absence is extraordinary, because: 
‘The development of a ship of two [my italics] levels of 
oarsmen emerges clearly from the ship representations of 
the period 700–480 BC’ (Morrison and Williams 1968, 
155).
Modern writers, for example Morrison and Coates (1986, 
32)  understandably   think  these  ships  are  remarkable 
and  ancient  writers  would  have  thought  so  too.  If  on 
the  other  hand  the  word  dieres meant  ‘double  banked’, 
the commonplace arrangement of a port oarsman and a 
===== PAGE 141 =====
Alec Tilley128
starboard on every bench, then its absence is not surprising. 
That simple arrangement would have been assumed unless 
the ship-type name implied something more complicated. 
Morrison meets the difficulty with a curt but unenforceable 
command:
‘  ...  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  term  pentekontor  ... 
covered   the  two-level   type’  (Morrison   and  Williams 
1968, 155) 
Consider the number ‘three’ applied to rowing. There was a 
small Greek merchant vessel called a phaselos, which could 
be converted in an emergency into an auxiliary warship 
called a phaselos trieretikos. The word trieretikos, like the 
Greek and Latin words for trireme, implies a three-fold 
rowing system. No one supposes that a phaselos trieretikos 
could have had six banks of oars (Casson 1995, 168). It 
could well have had three, the conversion consisting of 
adding a third bank of oars and oarsmen down the middle 
line of an originally double-banked phaselos, as I did with 
a naval cutter (Tilley 1971). 
  Now consider ‘four’. There was an oared ship named 
tetreres after the number four. It is accepted that the tetreres 
was the first warship to use more than one man to each 
oar. The new system is likely to have been introduced in 
its simplest possible form. As Morrison wrote: 
‘The tetreres could then have had four men to each ‘room’ 
... rowing two men to each of two oars. (Morrison and 
Williams 1968, 291). 
He  meant  eight men  rowing,  with  two  men  to  each  of 
four oars, but that is improbably complicated for a first 
attempt at a new system. He was, I think, wrong in what 
he meant but right in what he wrote. 
  That is confirmed by remarks of Paulinus of Nola, cited 
by Casson (1995, 148). An ordinary merchant ship, too 
small to have had eight banks of oarsmen, was referred 
to  as  a  quadrireme.  The  oar  arrangement  I  suggest  for 
a ‘four’, two two-man oars to each bench, would suit a 
nondescript merchantman very well. 
  Now consider the number five. Alexander the Great was 
criticised for ostentation because his barge (keles) was rowed 
in a manner designated by the number five (Ephippos in 
Athenaeus 8.38, cited by T orr 1894, 109). Nobody believes 
that it had ten banks of oars. A keletes was something less 
than a ship. It could well have had five. 
  The idea that the number in the name was the number 
in cross-section is new only in respect of the lower numbers. 
Admiral Rodgers, USN considered that the monstrous ship 
called a forty had forty oarsmen to a ‘room’, regarding as 
preposterous the eighty men that the three-level trireme 
hypothesis requires (Rodgers 1937, 256). Needless to say, 
I agree. 
Annex 4
Pseudo-evidence
Several representations that do not show oars at three levels 
have been ‘improved’, by members of the T rireme T rust, 
with imaginary additions or distortions and presented as 
pseudo-evidence in favour of three-level triremes.
  The sherd known as the Vienna fragment (see Annex 
1) is not very impressive in itself, but it illustrates the use 
of pseudo-evidence most clearly. The rowing arrangement 
that the artist has actually shown consists of three semi-
circular oar-ports at two levels. Morrison and Coates see 
it as a representation of a warship with three levels of oars, 
just like the Olympias. The Olympias’s uppermost row of 
oars is suggested to them by a line of thole pins which 
through ‘rough drawing’ the artist has entirely neglected 
to depict. They interpret the lower-level oarport as a large, 
circular, Olympias-type oarport, transmuted by the same 
‘rough drawing’ into the equal-sized, semi-circular oarport 
that we can actually see. 
  The Dal Pozzo drawing (Morrison, Coates and Rankov 
2000, 13, fig. 11) was made in the seventeenth century 
AD. It shows a ship with oars at two levels. It is used by 
Morrison and Coates as evidence that triremes had oars at 
three levels, by first imagining that it is a copy made by an 
ignorant artist of a three-level original and then assuming 
that the imaginary three-level original was a trireme. 
  In  the  well-known  Lenormant  relief  (Morrison  and 
Williams 1968, 170–3, clas. 1 and pls 23a; 24; Morrison, 
Coates and Rankov 2000, 16, fig. 13), what the sculptor 
has actually shown is a single row of oars and oarsmen. 
The other oblique and horizontal lines resemble the side of 
the sixteenth-century galeasse from the Battle of Lepanto 
depicted  in  an  engraving  of  1573  by  Fernando  Bertelli 
in the Museo Storico Navale in Venice (see Gardiner and 
Morrison 1995, 161, bottom right).  
  To  transform  what  we  actually  see  into  something 
resembling the Olympias, Morrison assumed ancient paint 
(of which there is now no trace) to run the oblique features 
across the horizontal ones so that they could be interpreted 
as a second and third level of oars. The undisputed oars do 
cross the horizontal wales. The oblique features do not. 
  Basch rightly pointed out that even with the addition 
of  ancient  paint,  the  oblique  features  would  not  form 
straight lines. He therefore proposed an ancient original 
of which the Lenormant relief is an inaccurate copy by 
an ignorant artist. That is just what Morrison and Coates 
proposed for the Dal Pozzo drawing. 
  It has been remarked that the oars could not have been 
parallel to each other at the point in the stroke shown on 
the Lenormant relief. One is asked to presume that the 
Lenormant sculptor really saw oars as in Morrison, Coates 
and Rankov 2000, 281, fig. 83, but carved what he actually 
did carve ‘for the sake of art’ (Shaw 1993, 1). 
  Morrison and Coates observed that there is not enough 
space between the wales on the actual sculpture for oarports 
as  large  as  the  lowest  ones  of  the  Olympias (Morrison, 
Coates and Rankov 200, 280). We are asked to assume, 
and mentally correct, an error on the part of the sculptor, 
not in the design of the Olympias. 
  In the new design, the oarsmen are skewed, so that at 
===== PAGE 142 =====
16. An Unauthentic Reconstruction 129
the beginning of the stroke each rower’s arms, viewed from 
abeam, will overlap the body of the rower next aft. Even 
the most imaginative application of supposed ancient paint 
that has subsequently perished will surely not be able to 
transform the Lenormant relief into something resembling 
this new design. 
  At  the  conference,  Dr  Coates  perceived  a  waterline 
located in such a way as to make the ship on the Lenormant 
relief  unlike  Bertelli’s  Lepanto   galeasse.   I  cannot  see 
a  waterline  on  the  Lenormant  relief.  Perhaps,  like  the 
supposed two lower levels of oars, it was depicted in ancient 
paint of which there is now no trace. 
  Finally it should be noted that there is no evidence that 
the Lenormant relief pre-dates polyremes, so that if it did 
have oars at three levels, it could have been a six. Lucien 
Basch thinks it is Roman. 
  The  T rireme  T rust’s  approach  to  iconography  allows 
rows of oars to be subtracted as well as added. A sixth-
century vase painting (Greenhill and Morrison 1995, fig. 
179)  shows  a  ship  that  appears  to  have  been  built  for 
around 100 oars, half of them rowed over the top wale and 
half through the empty oarports. But that would conflict 
with the T rireme T rust’s doctrine that the two-level ships 
portrayed in the trireme era must be 13-roomed, 50-oared, 
two-level pentekontors (despite the fact that no ancient 
author mentions them). As Morrison sees it: 
‘The oars however have been carelessly shown as coming 
quite  unrealistically   over  the  topwale  and  leaving  the 
oarports unmanned’ (Morrison in Greenhill and Morrison 
1995, 148).
Those heroic efforts to make evidence fit theory transform 
several monuments into ships exactly like the Olympias; but 
in science, theory must be adjusted to suit evidence. If we 
allow ourselves to argue from supposed ancient paint of 
which there is now no trace, or from supposed originals of 
which the actual monuments are supposed to be erroneous 
copies, then we will be able to find ample evidence for the 
proposition that ancient pigs had wings.
Annex 5
How did the oars differ?
Athenian inscriptions show that an Athenian trireme had 
three types of oar, in addition to the spares. In the Olympias 
a different type of oar was supplied for each level, but for 
the new design it is considered that one type of oar will 
suit all. Thus the question of how the oars differed remains 
a minor mystery. Dr Coates has cautiously suggested that 
the difference in the oars may have been only a question 
of marking or of wear pattern. Though one of those might 
be  the  right  explanation,  I  think  there  are  two  scraps 
of evidence against them: first, an oar put forward as a 
thranite  oar  was  rejected  as  such  by  the  dockyard,  but 
accepted as a zygian. This suggests to me that a thranite 
oar was more valuable than a zygian. Second, it appears 
(admittedly from evidence of a later date) that thranite 
oars alone were balanced with lead in the handles. Those 
two factors suggest an answer based on twentieth-century 
Royal Naval practice.
  A naval gig was the captain’s particular boat, and the 
crew of the captain’s gig were selected oarsmen. Gigs’ oars 
were narrow in the loom (hence light) with broad, spoon-
shaped blades and (unlike other naval oars) balanced with 
lead. A gig’s crew needed the skill to feather their oars, or 
the broad blades would have been a hindrance when going 
against a strong wind. The oar was made in one piece, so 
that the broad blade was extravagant in timber as well as 
in the skill and time required to make one. Officers were 
taught  that  the  width  of  blade  should  be  measured  to 
forestall rascally contractors. 
  A  naval  whaler  was  the  sea  boat  used  for  general 
purposes and rowed by sailors of the seaman branch. The 
oars were thicker than a gig’s and had narrower blades, 
not spoon-shaped.
  A  naval  cutter  was  a  bigger  boat,  often  rowed  by 
libertymen not necessarily of the seaman branch and not 
necessarily quite sober. The oars were thick in the loom 
and the blades were narrow.
  Slim, light oars are essential for a good performance. 
In naval regattas, the oars were shaved down to the limit 
allowed  by  the  rules.  It  may  seem  slightly  contrary  to 
common  sense  that  the  best  oarsmen,  who  could  be 
expected to pull the strongest, used the slimmest and hence 
weakest oars, but it is so. Oars are broken more by some 
error or clumsiness than by a fair strain. In regattas, oars 
were often broken and spares (limited by the rules to one 
or two) were carried. Crews practised the drill whereby 
the cox tossed a spare oar to an oarsman, over the heads 
of the others. 
  If the thranites used oars like a gig’s, the zygians like a 
whaler’s and the thalamians like a cutter’s, it would suit 
what evidence we have. The oar he carried would mark a 
sailor’s rank when ashore. Spare oars had to be different 
enough to thwart would-be tricksters’ claims for pay. Only 
a man with a thranite oar could draw a thranite’s extra 
pay. 
Annex 6
A reply to Dr Coates
In an Annex produced for the conference but printed in 
this  volume,  Dr  Coates  began  by  deftly  demolishing  a 
hypothesis which no one has ever advocated – a trireme 
of 40 rooms. He went on to ask why the ‘post-Cimon’ 
triremes I advocate should have been called a trieres when 
they could be rowed with four oarsmen abreast. The answer 
is that they retained the name because they were built for 
three oarsmen abreast, and famously fought triple-banked 
at Salamis, acquiring the capacity for four oarsmen abreast 
only when Cimon widened the Salamis fleet. 
  Even  then,  they  were  not  always  rowed  with  four 
banks of oarsmen. Some admirals preferred to keep them 
triple banked, ancient fleets being limited by the number 
===== PAGE 143 =====
Alec Tilley130
of oarsmen available. In defensive operations, Alcibiades 
manned about 100 ships, presumably triple banked. When 
Konon  replaced  him  as  admiral  at  Samos,  he  adopted 
an aggressive strategy requiring high-performance ships, 
presumably four-banked, and so could man only about 
70 (Xenophon Hellenica, 1.5.19). 
  Dr  Wallinga  wrote  in  his  paper  for  the  conference, 
citing Xenophon Hellenica 1.6.19:
‘To  this  end  Konon  chose  the  two  fastest  ships  –  tas 
arista pleousas – in his squadron and took the best rowers 
from all his ships to man them. Here the term tas arista 
pleousas cannot have what in my view is its usual meaning 
–  that  the  ships  had  very  large  or  full  crews  –  because 
Xenophon gives them this title before they were manned’ 
(see p. 152). 
I  suggest  that  tas arista pleousas   means  that  the  chosen 
ships were fitted for very large or full crews, confirming 
my  hypothesis  that  some  triremes  of  the  time,  having 
been  widened  by  Cimon,  could  take  four  oarsmen  on 
each bench; while other (unmodified) triremes remained 
suitable only for the three oarsmen per bench that their 
name  implies.  At  the  conference  Dr  Wallinga  opposed 
this suggestion. 
  In criticising the characteristics of four-banked ships 
Dr Coates goes badly astray, asserting:
‘If the oarcrew were on one level the hull could not be 
any narrower [than a 170]...’ 
Since he goes on to discuss performance, I presume he 
means ‘narrower at the water line’ rather than narrower 
overall.  But  the  ship  I  envisage  had  an  outrigger,  and 
closely resembles the Nike of Samothrace ship. The rowing 
arrangements relate to the waterline width no more than 
the width of the flight deck relates to the waterline width 
of an aircraft carrier. The waterline width of Dr Coates’ 
new design seems from his fig. 10.1 (p. 83) to be a little 
under 4 metres, while I suppose that of a trireme to have 
been considerably less. 
  The new design has one room less than the Olympias 
and (as I have always suggested for triremes) has 30 rooms 
– a small but not insignificant convergence. Nevertheless, 
I  think  most  triremes  were  rather  shorter  than  the  40 
metres Dr Coates specifies. As we can see from the Nike 
of Samothrace ship, the backs of the foremost oarsmen 
can be nearly level with the stem post. 
  Some of Dr Coates’ criticism I cannot understand: ‘If 
there were two levels with four men to a ‘room’ ... the hull 
could be narrower only if the hypozoma were not present, 
thus ignoring evidence ...’ Drawings would perhaps help 
to clarify this. 
  In discussing stability, I suspect Dr Coates is harking 
back to the lampoon he published in  Antiquity (Coates 
1995, 160), ascribing to me the notion of a trireme with 
‘two superimposed levels of oarsmen’. Otherwise he has 
no way of knowing the difference in height (which I think 
could be very slight) between the two levels. In any case, 
the question of stability is more difficult than he supposes, 
and cannot be calculated from the shape of the ship alone. 
The distribution of weight is an important factor (Gilmer 
1975, 68).
  The  sentence  ‘This  [Tilley’s]  proposed  ship  cannot 
therefore not be expected to be quite as fast in sprint as 
‘170’, but slower at lower oar powers’ is incomprehensible 
to me, but perhaps misprinted. In any case it rests on the 
false  assumption  that  an  oarsman  in  his  design  would 
produce as much power as one in mine. But my oarsmen 
gain the benefit of a sliding seat (Hale 1996), which makes 
a big difference, while the upper two levels of his oarsmen 
are not able to row efficiently, even by the standards of 
fixed-seat rowing, because their oars are at too steep an 
angle. 
  The weight of the ship I propose is an important factor 
in relation to its performance, and the ‘calculations’ that Dr 
Coates makes about it are no more than guess-work. Any 
ship’s weight must depend a great deal on how strongly it 
is built. I agree with Casson (1995, 89) that an Athenian 
high-performance trireme (there may well have been other 
kinds) was ‘ ... like an overgrown racing shell’, and ‘ ... 
light enough to be drawn up by their crews on the beach 
at night’ and hauled overland more than two miles in a 
day. By contrast, ‘the need to beach to escape bad weather 
and overnight was not [original underlining] agreed’ as a 
requirement for the Olympias (Coates and McGrail 1984, 
87), though it is not clear why not. 
  Finally, I envisage a trireme with the ‘rocker or sprung 
keel shape’ advocated by Professor Gillmer (Coates and 
McGrail  1984,  114–23)   and  rejected   in  Dr  Coates’ 
Olympias and in his new design, which allows a lighter 
hull for a given strength, as well as conforming with the 
iconography. 
Annex 7
Some comments on Dr Papalas’ paper
Dr Papalas considers that the speed of the Olympias under 
oar was: 
‘  ...  generally   in  line  with  fifth  century  performance 
capabilities ... ‘ (see p. 101). 
I suggest the opposite. The best speed that the Olympias 
has been able to sustain for not quite five minutes is 7.1 
knots  (Shaw  1993,  42),  appreciably  less  than  the  7.5 
knots that ancient triremes kept up for seventeen hours to 
cover 129 miles in a day according to Morrison, Coates 
and Rankov (2000, 103–4). It seems a vast discrepancy 
to me. Moreover, when Dr Papalas says that
‘ ... the multi-level oared vessel proved satisfactory in four 
sea trials ...’ (see p. 101)
he does not mention one important finding of the rowing 
trials:
‘The thalamian [lowest] level was not worth its place in the 
ship’ (Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 77).
===== PAGE 144 =====
16. An Unauthentic Reconstruction 131
That seems unsatisfactory to me. It might well have been 
acceptable in an 18th-century French galley, more valued 
as a prison hulk than as a warship, but in the Athenian 
navy a trireme was judged principally by its performance 
under oars, and the number of oarsmen available limited 
the size of the fleet. 
  Dr Papalas considers that the Lenormant relief shows 
a trireme in realistic detail, but does not tell us why he 
thinks the ship depicted is a trireme. As he says, Morrison’s 
views on triremes were ‘ ... considerably influenced by an 
interpretation [my emphasis] of the Lenormant relief ...’, 
the interpretation being very unlike the relief itself. See 
Annex 4 to this paper. Similarly, a ship depicted on T rajan’s 
column is said by Dr Papalas to be a trireme (pp. 105–6), 
but he gives no evidence to support his contention.
  In criticising my ideas on triremes, Dr Papalas conflates 
the two different systems of triple-banked rowing that I 
have put forward (Tilley 1970; 1971; 1976; 1992; 1997; 
2004;  Tilley  and  Fenwick  1973):  a  two-level  system, 
and the system shown on the Siren Vase (Morrison and 
Williams 1968, 114, arch. 94 and pl. 21e). Then he asserts 
that ‘this ship of 135 feet for a beam of 8 ft could not be 
housed in the ship-sheds built for the Athenian triremes’ 
(p. 106). I cannot understand the length or the beam he 
cites. Neither figure has anything to do with me. I have 
always had in mind a trireme slightly shorter than most 
reconstructions; one of 30 rooms, as now proposed by the 
T rireme T rust, as opposed to the 31 rooms of the Olympias. 
Moreover Dr Papalas seems not to perceive any difficulty in 
fitting the 40-metre length of the T rireme T rust’s proposed 
new trireme into the same ship-sheds.
  Dr  Papalas  (p.  106)  asserts  that  the  evidence  for  a 
trireme with three tiers of oarsmen is substantial, but does 
not tell us what it is. He says that ‘Tilley ... ignores evidence 
when it does not support his thesis’ but does not say what 
I have ignored. He thinks that a man pulling a pair of oars 
each 14 feet long would require ‘fantastic strength’ but the 
opinion, true or false, is irrelevant. There is no evidence 
as to the length of the oars used in two-level ships. He 
refers to ‘Tilley’s oarsmen spread across the deck’, but I do 
not envisage any oarsmen at all on deck. He suggests that 
the oar system shown on the Siren Vase would not work 
well, seeking to beat down from the armchair conclusions 
based on trials. 
  I must agree with him that my trials of the Siren Vase 
oar system (Tilley 1971) were extremely sketchy, and did 
not meet scientific standards. The deficiency was the result 
of lack of time and resources. Neither Dr Papalas’ assertion 
that the system would not work, nor Dr Coates’ recently 
expressed opinion that it would, is of much value. The 
crying need is for triple-banked rowing to be evaluated 
thoroughly by trials. 
Annex 8
Against waiting for wrecks
It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  we  are  all  wasting  our 
time discussing ancient warships while there are so few 
remains,  and  that  no  solution  to  the  trireme  problem 
based on ancient written and iconographic evidence (as 
solutions have to be at present) will ever be agreed upon, 
and that we should therefore wait until archaeology gives 
the answer. It is on that basis that editorial policy does 
not allow the idea that triremes had six oarsmen in cross-
section to be questioned in  The International Journal of 
Nautical Archaeology . But archaeology will not solve the 
problem. 
  Imagine that an ancient Mediterranean warship wreck 
is found, perfectly preserved, with the remains of three 
oarsmen  on  each  bench,  oars  clutched  in  their  skeletal 
hands, in a rowing arrangement exactly like my decoding 
of the Siren Vase. Suppose that the wreck’s dimensions are 
exactly  those  of  the  Samothrace  ship.  Will  people  who 
at  present  support  three-level  triremes  concede  that  it 
supports the idea of triple-banked triremes? Certainly not. 
Even those of them who at present believe that the Siren 
Vase ship was rowed three men to a bench (and they include 
Casson and Coates, and once included Morrison) do not 
waver in their faith in three-level triremes. To describe the 
Siren Vase system they use the word moneres, because all 
the oarsmen are at one level (Casson); or used the word 
hemiolia because on each bench there are one-and-a-half 
oarsmen  each  side  (Morrison).  We  might  discover  that 
the bottom of the Bay of Salamis was littered with triple-
banked  warships,  without  faith  in  six-banked  triremes 
being in the slightest degreee shaken.
  Or imagine (as is slightly less unlikely) the discovery 
of a Hellenistic or Roman wreck with oars at three levels. 
The  same  woolly-mindedness   that  allows  advocates  of 
three-level triremes to use Roman and Hellenistic three-
level representations as evidence for three-level triremes, 
would allow three-level wrecks to be used for the same 
purpose. 
  Yet again, postulate the discovery of a wreck with clear 
evidence of oars at one or two levels, and above that the 
jumbled  remains  of  upperworks.  What  could  be  easier 
than to postulate a lost line of thole pins to make pseudo-
evidence for a three-level trireme? It would be much easier 
and less unconvincing to add imaginary thole-pins to an 
actual wreck than to add (as Morrison and Coates do), 
an imaginary third level to a representation such as the 
Vienna fragment which clearly never had it. 
  It seems to me highly desirable to adopt reason and logic 
in the study of ancient warships,  before ancient warship 
wrecks are discovered. 
Bibliography
Casson, L. (1995) Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. 
Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Coates,  J.  F .  (1993)  The  naval  architecture  of  European 
oared  ships.  Royal Institution of Naval Architects Record 
of Spring Meeting. London,  Royal  Institution  of  Naval 
Architects, 1–9.
Coates, J. F . (1995) Tilley’s and Morrison’s triremes. Antiquity 
69 (1995), 159–62.
===== PAGE 145 =====
Alec Tilley132
Coates, J. F . and McGrail, S. (eds) (1984) The Greek trireme of 
the 5th Century B.C. Greenwich, T rustees of the National 
Maritime Museum.
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K and Shaw, J. T . (ed.) (1990) The 
Trireme Trials 1988. Report on the Sea Trials of Olympias. 
Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Gardiner, R.  and  Morrison,  J.  S.  (eds)  (1995)  The Age of 
the Galley. Mediterranean Oared Vessels since Pre-Classical 
Times. London, Conway Maritime Press.
Gillmer, T . C. (1975) Modern Ship Design. Annapolis, Naval 
Institute Press.
Gillmer, T . C. (1984) An alternative reconstruction. In Coates 
and McGrail 1984, 114–23. 
Gillmer, T . C. (1985) The Thera ships as sailing vessels. The 
Mariner’s Mirror 71.4, 401–16.
Greenhill, B. and Morrison, J. S. (1995) The Archaeology of 
Boats and Ships. London, Conway Maritime Press.
Hale,  J.  R.  (1996)  The  lost  technology  of  ancient  Greek 
rowing. Scientific American (May), 66–71.
Harden, D.  (1962)  The Phoenicians.  London,  Thames  and 
Hudson.
Höckmann, O. (1993) Late Roman Rhine vessels from Mainz, 
Germany. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 22, 
125–35.
Höckmann,  O.  (1997)  The  Liburnian:  some  observations 
and insights. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 
26, 192–216.
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1941)  The  Greek  trireme.  The Mariner’s 
Mirror 27, 14–44.
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1979)  ‘The  first  triremes’,  The Mariner’s 
Mirror 65, 53–63.
Morrison,   J.  S.  and   Coates,   J.  F.  (eds)   (1989)   An 
Athenian Trireme Reconstructed. The British Sea Trials of 
Olympias, 1987. BAR International Series 486. Oxford, 
Archaeopress.
Morrison, J. S. and Williams, R. T . (1968) Greek Oared Ships 
900–322 B.C. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F ., and Rankov, N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  Cambridge 
University Press.
Roberts,  O.  (1995)  An  explanation  of  ancient  windward 
sailing. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology  24, 
307–15.
Rodgers,  W.  L.  (1937)  Greek and Roman Naval Warfare. 
Annapolis MD, United States Naval Institute.
Shaw, T . (ed.) (1993) The T rireme Project. Operational Experience 
1987–90. Lessons Learnt. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Torr,  C.  (1894)   Ancient Ships. Cambridge,   Cambridge 
University Press.
T orr, C. (1905) T riremes. Classical Review 19, 466.
Tarn, W . W . (1905) The Greek warship. Journal of Hellenic 
Studies 25 (1905), 154–95.
Tarn, W . W . (1906) Thranite, zugite, and thalamite. Classical 
Review 20 (1906), 75–7.
Tilley,  A.  F .  (1970)  The  ship  of  Odysseus.  Antiquity 44, 
100–104. 
Tilley, A. F . (1971) ‘An experiment under oars’, Antiquity 45, 
plates 10 and11.
Tilley,  A.  F.  (1976)   Rowing   the  trireme   –  a  practical 
experiment  in  seamanship.  The Mariner’s Mirror 62.4, 
357–369.
Tilley, A.  F . (1992)  Three  men  to  a  room  –  a  completely 
different trireme. Antiquity 66, 599–61
Tilley, A. F . (1997) Ancient warships – a scientific approach. 
In Cogar, W .B. (ed.), New Interpretations in Naval History: 
selected papers from the Twelfth Naval History Symposium. 
Annapolis MD, Naval Institute Press, 1ff.
Tilley, A. F . (2004) Seafaring in the Ancient Mediterranean. 
New Thoughts on Triremes and Other Ancient Ships. BAR 
International Series 1268. Oxford, Archaeopress.
Tilley, A. F . and Fenwick, V . H. (1973) Rowing in the ancient 
Mediterranean:  a  new  aspect.  The Mariner’s Mirror 59, 
96–9.
===== PAGE 146 =====
Part 4
The Operation and Performance 
of Ancient T riremes
===== PAGE 147 =====
17.  On Slipping and Launching T riremes  
from the Piraeus Shipsheds and from Beaches
It may safely be assumed that the shipsheds in Zea harbour 
in the Piraeus were built to house Athenian triremes of 
the  fourth-century   BC,  a  period  when  it  is  probable 
that the design of the trireme had matured and become 
largely  standardised.   It  may  also  be  assumed  that  for 
decades before that time triremes had been beached as a 
routine for drying out, repair and storage ashore before 
the Piraeus sheds were built. The sheds would therefore 
have been built to use much the same procedure as had 
been established for hauling up on to and launching from 
beaches. Because some aspects of the sheds are known by 
excavation, launching and slipping in the Piraeus sheds 
will  be  considered  in  this  paper  first,  before  discussing 
beaching triremes.
The Piraeus shipsheds
In view of the considerable cost of the sheds and slipways 
(probably more than that of the ships themselves) and the 
restricted space available in Zea harbour, it seems likely 
that they were built no larger nor any more elaborately 
than was necessary for their purpose. Nevertheless, there 
can be little doubt that the shipsheds were as necessary to 
sustaining the power of Athens as the ships they housed; 
they were the essential means not only to keep unsheathed 
hulls of the warships out of the water as far as possible, 
in order to keep them clean and free of teredo worms, but 
also to protect the ships from sun and rain to extend their 
lives. The cost of the sheds must have been considered to 
be an economic investment. Later in the fourth century 
some of them housed quadriremes.
  Until the recent, ongoing work of the Greek-Danish 
Zea Harbour Project, our knowledge of these sheds came 
mainly  from  the  hurried  rescue  excavation  carried  out 
in 1885 by Iakob Dragatsis (Dragatsis 1886) and whose 
findings were drawn by Dörpfeld. In the short time at their 
disposal  those  19th-century  excavators  did  remarkably 
well, but there are gaps in their evidence which have raised 
a number of questions which have remained with us in 
John Coates
the absence of excavations of shipsheds in Zea since 1885, 
although some are now being answered. 
  In  designing  Olympias  to  accord  with  the  evidence 
available   at  the  time  of  her  construction   and  to  be 
operationally  workable,  the  demands  of  space  for  the 
oarsystem and of waterline breadth for adequate stability 
afloat called for her overall breadth to be little short of 
the breadth between the columns of the sheds as revealed 
by Dragatsis. The recent underwater surveys of some Zea 
slips have established the total length of at least one slipway 
to be in excess 50 metres, and it has been suggested that 
some at least may have been as much 90 m long; in other 
words, they may have housed two triremes, one behind 
the other (see now Lovén 2011). This does not alter the 
considerations  and  arguments  of  this  paper  apart  from 
indicating  that  triremes  could  have  been  longer  than 
Olympias’ length of 36.8 metres, and perhaps as long as 
40 metres or more overall.
  Though  not  without  her  shortcomings,  Olympias  has 
proved herself by trial to be as seaworthy as her proportions 
allow and has given good indications of being very close to 
the original. Blackman (1987) has already considered some 
questions about these sheds and slipways: the number of 
men needed to haul ships up the slips; the friction between 
keel and groundways and lubrication; coatings for bottom 
planking; the use of timber on stone slips; the length of the 
slips and the operations carried out on ships in the sheds. It 
is therefore appropriate now to consider in more detail how 
such a ship could have been manipulated in a Zea shed.
  The essential operational questions are:
i)  As triremes, not having flat bottoms, would have been 
unstable when supported on their keel out of the water, 
how were they supported laterally in the sheds?
ii)  At what point did triremes become stable as they entered 
the water from the slip?
iii)  How  far  below  the  water  level  must  the  slips  have 
extended?
iv)  How could the ships have been hauled up and down 
the slips?
===== PAGE 148 =====
17. On Slipping and Launching Triremes from the Piraeus Shipsheds and from Beaches 135
The  writer  has  reviewed  the  hazards  of  launching  ships 
and some of those affecting triremes in particular (Coates 
1993).  In  this  paper,  further  work  by  William  Penney 
(1987)  as  well  as  by  the  writer  on  the  mechanics  of 
launching  (and  equally,  of  hauling  up)  Olympias  on  a 
reconstructed slipway is reported. This work, by hydrostatic 
and structural calculation with some corroboration by 1⁄25th 
scale model experiments (Annex 1), has first re-examined 
the lateral support of the ship while being moved on the 
slip and some details of moving the ship, then the point 
during launch or hauling up when the bow lifts from the 
slip, then the point at which the ship is neutrally stable, 
and finally where the after end of the keel would leave the 
bottom of the slip as the ship floats free. The hull lines 
of Olympias at displacement stations Nos. 1 to 23 spaced 
1.6155 m apart (1 Station is near the tip of the ram) are 
shown in Fig. 17.1. Her relevant numerical particulars, and 
those of the shed and slipway are given in Annex 2.
Lateral support in the shed
To keep the ship upright when out of the water, the hull 
shape  of  a trireme  makes  some  form  of  lateral  support 
essential. It could be provided by a sliding cradle (or two 
cradles)  under  the  hull,  or  by  sliding  supports  on  each 
side, or by the pillars of the shed. In launching, support 
is needed until enough of the ship is in the water to give 
her at least neutral stability. The support must also allow 
the ship to hinge about the after end of the flat keel (called 
the after cut-up, or ACU) as the bow lifts; it must therefore 
extend aft as far as the position of the ACU at the point 
of travel at which the ship has neutral stability.
  The length of a trireme would call for a cradle (or the 
extent of two cradles) to be at least 15m long to provide 
sufficient   vertical  support  longitudinally.   There  is  no 
mention  of  such  things  in  the  literature  which,  if  they 
existed, is strange because they would have been large and 
important. While it is possible that triremes were floated 
onto  and  off  wheeled  trolleys  functioning  like  cradles 
at each end of the Corinth diolkos, the extra height and 
length of underwater slip needed, the depth of water and 
the rocky bottom of the Piraeus harbours make the use of 
such vehicles there most improbable, and handling a cradle, 
even if contrived to float at a suitable waterline, under a hull 
while afloat would be a cumbersome manoeuvre to manage 
for a ship as long as a trireme. A cradle would have to have 
timbers passing under the keel, raising the necessary height 
of the roof of the shed. It would also add substantially to 
the mass to be hauled up and down the slip. Support of 
triereis by cradles is not therefore an attractive hypothesis 
even though it is the normal method employed today with 
generally shorter ships on slips usually in the open.
  The  writer  previously  advocated  the  use  of  sliding 
supports on each side of the ship, placed at the ACU. These 
could have slid on timber rails set near the edges of the 
masonry slips; they would have to be rigged soon after the 
ship made contact with the slip. However, the complexity 
of handling such supports, ensuring their safety, and the 
need for two additional timber groundways for them to 
slide  on,  as  well  as  their  interference  with  the  wooden 
decking which must have existed between the stone slips, 
have  persuaded  the  writer  to  think  that  the  ships  were 
supported laterally more simply (and cheaply) by the stone 
pillars of the sheds themselves, which can be calculated 
to be capable of safely withstanding the forces required, 
provided that the clearance with the ship is not too great. 
Stone pillars of the dimensions given by Dragatsis with 
lateral connection at the roof which they support can each 
withstand horizontal forces at the level of the main rail 
of Olympias up to safe lower limits of 1 tonne in the case 
of the roof ridge pillars 8.3 m high, and of 0.67 tonne 
in the case of the shorter roof valley pillars 5.5 m high. 
These limits neglect the stabilising effect of any thrust in 
them from the weight of roof bearing upon them (being 
a timber structure, the roof could bear unequally upon 
its supporting pillars, particularly the ridge pillars). These 
limiting loads are those needed to cause uncemented joints 
between drums nearest to the ship’s rail to open and form a 
hinge in the pillar. The lateral force required from the roof 
structure is in both cases only 0.2 tonne. Friction between 
pillar drums would be sufficient to prevent sliding except 
possibly in the case of any short, and so light, drums under 
the capital which may have to be pinned to ensure against 
sliding under the lateral roof force. 
  The total lateral force needed by  Olympias when her 
keel is assumed to be on a notional knife-edge on the slip 
at the middle line varies with the clearance between her 
outrigger rail and the pillars. If that were 10 cm, a quite 
practicable clearance, the total force would be 0.7 tonne, 
a force which the eight tall pillars or the 12 short pillars 
next  to  the  parallel  length  of  the  outrigger  could  most 
safely provide, even if owing to lack of alignment or ship 
deformation only a few of them are actually in contact with 
the ship. That lateral support was indeed provided by the 
pillars of the sheds is suggested by the relative constancy 
of the breadth between the columns of the sheds excavated 
by Dragatsis. That breadth varied from 6.47 m to 6.54 m, 
a range of only 7 cm, whereas the breadths of the stone 
slips varied one-and-a-half times as much. It may also be 
significant  that  the  lateral  strength  of  the  ridge  pillars, 
spaced  further  apart  than  the  valley  pillars,  is  the  same 
per unit-length of slip as that of the valley pillars; they 
were  equally  capable  of  supporting  the  ships  whichever 
way they leaned as they moved up or down the slips.
  The  outrigger  rail  would  probably  have  rubbed  on 
softwood pads set into the pillars rather than on the stone 
of the pillars themselves. As it would have been the breadth 
over the outrigger rails which would have had to have been 
a standard dimension to allow pillars to support the ships 
when being moved on the slips, likely variations in breadth 
of the hulls proper could have easily been compensated 
for  when  setting  the  overhangs   of  outriggers   so  that 
the  overall  breadth  conformed  to  a  standard  specified 
dimension so that the required clearance with the shed 
===== PAGE 149 =====
John Coates136
pillars was obtained with an acceptable accuracy. In the 
case of Olympias the pads on the pillars should protrude 
from the stone by about 25 cm, but less for any second, 
refined reconstruction of a trireme.
  Support by pillars would give a clear space at slip level 
between ship and pillars for men heaving on ropes to haul 
the ship up the slip; they would certainly need that space to 
be unobstructed. Lastly, when the ship was secured in the 
housed position, she could be wedged upright on shores, 
leaving the whole of the bottom clear for access for repairs, 
tightening tenon pegs, scraping, rubbing down, caulking 
and recoating, all of which operations would have been 
important  for  her  good  future  performance.  All  things 
considered, and given the known existence and details of 
the stone pillars, their use to support the ship when being 
launched or slipped seems simplest and most likely. 
Moving the ship on the slip
As already proposed by the writer (Coates 1993; 1997), 
a  coefficient  of  friction  of  about  0.2,  both  static  and 
dynamic, may be assumed to have been reliably attainable; 
lower values may be attainable in favourable circumstances 
but could not be relied upon in day-to-day practice. The 
hauling teams on each side of the ship, 70 men in each, 
pulling on each side of a rope in pairs could provide the 
required pull of 7.5 tonnes in heaves to haul the ship up 
the slip. Secure footholds would have been essential and 
this  demands  with  some  certainty  that  the  2.5  m  wide 
rocky-bottomed  spaces  between  the  masonry  slips  were 
boarded over firmly and provided with cross battens to 
make  footholds.   If  unobstructed   there  would  be  just 
enough space for such teams to work. They would mostly 
Figure 17.1. Lines of hull of Olympias (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 150 =====
17. On Slipping and Launching Triremes from the Piraeus Shipsheds and from Beaches 137
stay in the same place as the ship is hauled up the slip, 
each man at his foothold, coming forward on the rope 
after each heave. The hauling force would be about 4 to 5 
tonnes to start the ship up the slip (see below) and until, 
at the point called bow lift when launching, the flat keel 
settles on the slip. During further travel up the slip the 
hauling force will rise to 7.5 tonnes when the hull is clear 
of the water and the whole mass of the ship is supported 
on  the  groundway.  At  the  housed  position  the  hauling 
force needed would be increased, owing to the unavoidable 
obliquity of the pull to the leading blocks (see below), by 
12% to 8.4 tonnes, or 60 kg f. per man. 
  The  force  needed  to  move  the  ship  down  the  slip 
with the same coefficient of friction would be only 2.5 
tonnes, which could be provided by 50 men pulling on 
ropes secured to some convenient points near the stern. 
A small party on a check rope round a bollard at the head 
of the slip to control any motion between heaves would 
be needed in both cases, but particularly during the later 
stages of launching when the force needed to move the 
ship will become small.
Bow lift
In  considering  launching  (or,  in  reverse,  hauling  up), 
the  longitudinal  equilibrium  of  the  ship  as  she  enters 
(or leaves) the water is determined by her mass, position 
of  her  longitudinal  centre  of  gravity,  her  buoyancy,  the 
longitudinal position of the centre of buoyancy, and the 
longitudinal position of the ACU. In Olympias the bow 
starts  to  lift  to  the  increasing  buoyancy,  hinging  at  the 
ACU, (16 Station, Annex 2); the hinge point moves aft 
a little as she rolls on the upcurving after keel. The bow 
will lift off the groundway when the moment of the ship’s 
mass about 16 Station is equalled by the moment of the 
buoyancy about the same point. William Penney (1987) 
has shown that equality between them occurs when ACU at 
16 Station is 6.5 m from the point where the groundway’s 
sliding surface enters the water (GEW). In the 1⁄25 scale 
model bow lift occurred at the same point, in scale; its 
position will of course be sensitive to the actual mass of 
the ship when launched.  
  The upthrust acting at the hinge point when the bow 
lifts will be about 15 tonnes, a concentrated force which 
could cause lubrication to break down and the ship to stick 
on the ways. Lubrication in that region of the groundway 
is therefore particularly important and it may be advisable 
for the groundway to be of softwood to spread the length 
crushed  and  so  reduce  the  pressure  on  the  lubricant  to 
a  value  under  which  it  will  remain  effective.  The  well-
rounded curve of the keel at the ACU is helpful for that 
purpose.  Greasing  that  part  of  the  groundway  before  a 
launch would be possible because it lies under the ram 
when the ship is in the housed position. The lower 11 m 
of the groundway need to be able to withstand the load 
which diminishes to something less than 10 tonnes at the 
bottom end of the groundway.
  At bow lift the sagging bending moment on the hull is 
at its maximum during launch. Owing to the ACU being 
so far from the stern, this bending moment is fortunately 
only about 22 tonne m, whereas if the ACU were further 
aft it would be greater. This is a point of importance from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  working  of  the  hull  in  service 
owing to unavoidable, if small, looseness of plank tenons 
in their mortices, allowing hull planks to slide upon each 
other and so inducing onset of leakage. For most of the 
time afloat, the hull will experience hogging bending so 
any significant reversal of bending, by sagging, would tend 
to induce plank sliding and hence leakage.  
  As  the  bow  lifts  it  will  be  less  constrained   by  the 
groundway,  so  the  bow  of  the  ship  may  have  to  be 
prevented from being blown sideways should a side wind 
be blowing. In such winds, it would for that reason be 
prudent to keep the ship’s travel under firm control.
The point of neutral stability
The ship will continue to need lateral support as she travels 
down the slip until she has acquired neutral stability at 
least. If she is supported by pillars, these must extend far 
enough to support the after end of the outriggers, or some 
extensions if necessary, until she can stand up by herself. 
Like the point of bowlift, the point of neutral stability will 
move on the slip with the height of the mean water level 
and also with the tide. The mean water level at Piraeus 
in the fourth-century BC is not known but now appears 
to  have  been  c.  2  m  below  the  level  in  AD  1885.  The 
tidal  range  is  now  between  10  and  28  cm.  Hydrostatic 
calculation gives the ship neutral stability when supported 
at the ACU when the draft at ACU is 0.48 m, while the 
model indicated that point to be when the draft is 0.57 
m. The upthrust on ACU is about 10.5 tonnes. The point 
of neutral stability naturally varies according to where the 
ground support is applied to the ship, and experiments 
with the model show how it moves along the rising after 
keel  as  the  depth  of  immersion  of  the  pivoting  point 
varies. The results from the model have been converted 
into metres in the ship.
  The positions of the ship along the slip at those drafts 
naturally depend upon the slope of the slip underwater. 
If the slope were to continue underwater at, say, 1 in 10, 
those positions would be 4.8 and 5.7 m from where the 
groundway  entered  the  water  (GEW),  but  if  the  slope 
were to increase below water the sloping after keel might 
cause the ship never to touch any underwater part of the 
slipway. No underwater slip would then be necessary.
Bringing a trieres in to the slip
We have thus far discussed and arrived at some critical 
features  of  the  shed  and  slip  needed  for  launching  and 
hauling a trireme up the slip which conform to the available 
archaeological evidence. There is also the need to be able, 
as a practised routine, to bring the ship afloat stern first 
===== PAGE 151 =====
John Coates138
to the slip before hauling her up the slip. Harry Tzalas 
(1993) has usefully considered the important matter of 
manoeuvring triremes in Zea harbour and how they may 
have been lined up to enter sheds. Ships would then have 
to be guided more exactly on to the groundways. One has 
to allow for side winds blowing the ship off-centre to some 
extent and it must be expected that there were guides in 
some form to funnel the stern, as hauling began, on to the 
centreline of the slip and so on to the groundway. 
  Once again it is found that the shape of the stern of a 
trireme helps the alignment to occur. As soon as the ship 
has been hauled, floating, far enough for the after end of 
the outrigger, which is strongly supported by the threnos 
beam across the hull, to be past the first pillar of the shed, 
the ship can be allowed to rub if necessary against the pillar 
to bring the ship nearer the centreline of the slip as she 
is pulled aft. The next guide could be at the end of the 
groundway in the form of stout timbers sloping up from 
each side of the groundway at about 30° to a height of 
0.5 m (or 1 cubit) above the stone slip. These would catch 
the sloping keel of the ship, which would be constrained 
as the ship is hauled in to slide down whichever timber it 
was rubbing upon towards the middle until the keel landed 
on the groundway itself, 0.23 m below the water (when at 
its assumed mean level). At that point the stern would be 
held by mooring lines, possibly secured to some pillars or 
bollards, and some bow lines would be rigged and heaved 
upon as necessary to align the ship more accurately for 
hauling up the slip. 
  To  prepare  for  hauling,  two  40  mm  diameter  ropes 
each two ship-lengths long with bights at one end could 
be looped over the ram and led back up the slip on each 
side through leading blocks. It is proposed that hauling 
ropes  are  secured  to  the  ram  so  that  it  should  be  near 
hauling height and be attached to the ship as far forward 
as possible to reduce its obliquity near the end of the haul 
up the slip. The hauling ropes could have been discarded 
hypozomata ;  the  diameter  of  40  mm  is  more  than  is 
necessary  as  regards  strength  but  it  would  give  a  good 
hand-grip for the haulers.
The roof
The roof structure (Coulton 1977, 154–7) would probably 
have  consisted  of  timber  rafters  laid  on  and  secured  to 
timber  ridge  beams  spanning  the  ridge  pillars  and  to 
stone architraves spanning the valley pillars. The weight 
of  such  stone  architraves   would  significantly   increase 
the  strength  of  the  valley  pillars  to  resist  forces  needed 
to  support  ships  on  the  slips  laterally.  Rafters  would 
probably have coincided with each valley pillar and tile 
battens would have spanned the spaces between rafters. 
The rafters at mid-span must be more than 6.40 m above 
the sliding surface of the groundway to allow the tip of 
the aphlaston to pass under them safely. The area of roof 
over  two  slips  with  a  common  valley  would  have  been 
about 570 m2, so in heavy rain, falling for example at 30 
mm per hour, the flow to be cleared by the valley gutter 
would have been considerable, about 0.3 m3/minute; there 
would have to be a generous gutter (lead-lined?) on top 
of the architrave to avoid overflowing into the shed near 
the seaward end. In heavy rain, heavy falls of rainwater 
would have spouted from these gutters into the harbour. 
The design of the roof does not however bear on the main 
subject of this paper. 
What size of trireme?
So far what has been considered has been launching and 
hauling out Olympias. However, as has been made well-
known from the results of the lengthy sea trials of that 
ship,  it  has  been  found  beyond  reasonable  doubt  that 
triereis were built to a longer cubit than the so-called Attic 
cubit of 0.444 m to which Olympias was built; they were 
much more likely to have been built to the cubit of 0.490 
m (see Coates, pp. 82–91 above) and so triremes would 
probably have been about 40 m long overall, 3 m longer 
than Olympias. It would therefore be natural to ask whether 
the shed and slipway discussed above could accommodate 
a 40 m ship. Breadth, height, shape of stern and length 
would be so little different from Olympias as to need no 
changes to the shed or the slip.
Conclusions on the Piraeus shipsheds
This  discussion   about  working  the  Piraeus  sheds  and 
slipways to house triremes leads to the following particulars 
for a practicable shipshed which would be consistent with 
the findings of Dragatsis and Dörpfeld, and of the Greek-
Danish Zea Harbour Project:
i)   the  bottom  end  of  the  groundway  should  have  vee-
timbers to guide the rising after keel on to the centre 
of the groundway;
ii)  the bottom 12 m of the groundway should be capable 
of carrying a concentrated load of 15 tonnes at the top 
of that length, diminishing to 10 tonnes at the end of 
the groundway;
iii)  the space on either side of the stone slip would have to 
be boarded over and firmly secured to transmit a hauling 
force of 4 tonnes on each side, and have cross-battens 
to provide firm footholds for hauling teams of 35 pairs 
of men;
iv)   hauling ropes could be discarded hypozomata;
v)   pillars should have greased softwood rubbing blocks set 
into them at the height of the main outrigger rails of the 
trireme, and equidistant horizontally from the middle 
line of the groundway 0.10 m more than half the overall 
breadth of the ship, the blocks on the two seaward-end 
pillars being rounded to receive the stern-end of the rails 
and to extend over the range of their heights when the 
ship is afloat at all states of the tide; 
vi)   the underside of the roof structure at the middle line of 
the groundway throughout its length must be clear of 
the aphlaston of the ship.  
===== PAGE 152 =====
17. On Slipping and Launching Triremes from the Piraeus Shipsheds and from Beaches 139
Beaching
The  writer  has  previously  discussed  problems  raised  by 
hauling a trireme up a Mediterranean beach (Coates 1993; 
also, with Timothy Shaw, in Coates and Shaw 1993). As 
the force needed to pull a heavy mass up a slope on greased 
timber is so much less than that needed to do it directly 
on pebbles, it must be virtually certain that a ship would 
have been hauled up a beach on greased timbers, just as 
in the ship sheds. On a beach there is an additional reason 
for reducing the hauling force required as far as possible, 
namely  the  less  secure  footholds  provided  by  pebbles 
instead of purpose-made timber footholds proposed in the 
shed. The figures for coefficients of friction between timber 
and  greased  timber  (0.2)  and  between  timber  on  stone 
(0.4 to 0.5, i.e. more than double) are so compelling that 
the supposition that some form of timber ways were used 
on beaches even though no such items are recognisably 
included in the naval inventories.
  Also,  to  keep  the  hauling   force  within  practically 
achievable limits, it is not likely that ships were hauled 
up slopes of more than 1 in 10. However, Mediterranean 
beaches  are,  and  presumably  have  been  for  some  time, 
steeper than that, typically more like 1 in 5 (Fig. 17.2). 
They are commonly storm banks of pebbles thrown as high 
as they can be in extreme weather and below water there 
is often a plateau 1.5 to 2 m deep, being the limit of the 
reach of more common wave action. The 1 in 5 slope is 
not often long enough to support the length of a trireme, 
so it would have been necessary to excavate a slipway to 
reduce  the  slope  and  increase  the  length  of  support.  A 
slope of 1 in 10 could alternatively have been obtained 
by hauling out at an acute angle to the shoreline, but that 
course would have generated more problems than it solved. 
Each ship would need a greater length of beach, not always 
available,  be  exposed  to  wave  damage  (as  indeed  Julius 
Caesar’s triremes were in Kent in 55 BC), and a beached 
fleet would need a longer defensive perimeter. 
  Beaching triremes must, by these arguments, have been 
appreciably larger operations than beaching smaller types 
of warships and merchant ships: this point has not however 
come down to us in the literature (but as always, absence 
of evidence is not proof of absence). It must surely be the 
case that while beaching warships smaller (particularly if 
shorter) than triremes could have been practicable fairly 
frequently,  and  even  overnight,  it  is  hard  to  see  that 
triremes would have been beached except from necessity. 
Figure 17.2. Slipping and launching from a beach (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 153 =====
John Coates140
That would have been an operational and material penalty 
bearing upon the very decision to develop the larger and 
more powerful type in view of the increased risks and costs 
involved.
  It would, it is proposed, be possible, having formed a 
slipway as indicated in Fig. 17.2, to make a groundway of 
poles acting as sleepers on the pebbles across the slipway, 
with  portable  lengths  of  greased  planks  laid  over  them 
to form a groundway for the keel. Some form of bolsters 
would also be needed to provide a guide for the keel. As 
previously considered by the writer, triremes would have 
been both launched and hauled out upright, supported 
laterally  by  portable  shores  (the  parastatai)  during  the 
process  (Coates  1993).  This  hypothesis  was  supported 
by the experiment with the model (Annex 1) adapted to 
simulate launching from a beach. With the keel at a slope 
of 1 in 10, bow down and the hull resting on one bilge at 
an angle of 30° heel, the model showed that as the water 
level  in  the  trough  was  raised,  to  simulate  launching  a 
ship  leaning  on  one  bilge,  the  water  on  the  downside 
of the ship rose almost to the topwale of the hull before 
the  ship  righted  herself  shortly  before  becoming  stable 
upright  and  then  floating  off  the  beach.  Launching  (or 
equally, hauling out) on one bilge would therefore result 
in  flooding  the  ship  through  both  thalamian  oarports, 
whose  askomata  would  certainly  not  reliably  withstand 
the water pressure imposed, and zygian oarports, unless 
the  ship  was  equipped  with  well-fitting  blanks  to  plug 
the  oarports.  About  15  to  20  oarports  would  have  had 
to be so equipped if triremes were beached when leaning 
on one bilge. There is no mention of such items in the 
inventories, but it could be that, because they must be a 
good fit in each port, they were singular to each one and 
therefore numbered and kept in the ship at all times, not 
in the main storehouse, and therefore do not appear in the 
naval lists. This method calls for a second groundway for 
the bilge to slide on and a stout bilge rubbing strake to 
be incorporated into the planking of the ship. The weight 
of the ship would be about equally shared between keel 
and bilge and it would be desirable, if not essential, for 
the hull to have a good length of parallel middle body to 
spread the load on the bilge as far as practicable fore and 
aft. 
  Alternatively,  to  keep  the  ship  upright  while  being 
moved up or down groundways on a beach as suggested 
in Fig. 17.2, the technique of ‘walking shores’ would have 
had to be used, by which the heel of one of each pair of 
shores would be brought forward between each heave on 
the hauling ropes to be in a position to support the ship 
during and after the next heave. During that heave, the 
shore just brought forward would take the load while the 
other shore of the pair would trail on the ground if, as 
is likely, its head is secured to a suitably strong point in 
the hull, freeing it to be brought forward in its turn. The 
naval  lists  (
IG 22  1611.38)  indicate  that  two  parastatai 
were carried in each ship, and if that indication is correct 
the practice must have been to keep the ship leaning over 
to one side sufficiently far to make sure that she would 
never fall over on to the other bilge, which would be very 
damaging. On the other hand, if that angle were excessive, 
so would be the thrust in the walking shores (e.g. if the 
ship were to lean over by 10° the required thrust in the 
supporting   shore  would  be  3  tonnes);   perhaps   some 
auxiliary shores (not mentioned in the naval lists) were also 
manned and kept in place on the other side of the ship 
as a precaution to prevent such a disaster to the beaching 
operation. Walking shores call for skill and co-ordination 
in their safe use. 
  As the stern is pulled out of the water, the ship will 
quickly become unstable upright, as already described in 
connection with the shipsheds, and the ship must either be 
kept upright or allowed to lean over on to one bilge. Both 
procedures  have  their  difficulties  and  dangers.  Hauling 
ropes could have been rigged as proposed for the sheds, but 
probably without the benefit of leading blocks. The spare 
hypozomata carried in triremes could have been used for 
hauling out on to a beach when that became necessary. 
  As one of the main objects of hauling out would have 
been to dry out the hull, tighten tenon pegs, clean, stop and 
re-coat the bottom, the whole bottom would have had to be 
made accessible on both sides of the ship, only possible if 
the ship was upright. The crew of a trireme could however 
raise the unloaded ship upright if she had been hauled out 
on one bilge by the combination of their weight pulling 
down on the high side and a smaller number lifting and 
then pushing up on the low side. When upright, shores 
would have been set up (Homer Odyssey 2.153 describes 
an earlier and smaller type of ship supported, when ashore 
in a trench, by piles of stones confirming also that their 
bottoms were not then flat). 
    It  is  clear  from  these  considerations  taken  together 
that beaching a trireme is no light operation and that it 
is unlikely that triremes were any heavier than Olympias. 
Acknowledgements
The writer is indebted to William Penney for permission 
to  make  use  of  his  unpublished  launching  calculations, 
to  David  Blackman  for  his  great  knowledge  of  ancient 
Mediterranean  shipsheds,  and  to  Norman  Gundry  for 
permission  to  use  his  ship  model  for  the  experiments 
described in Annex 1. 
Annex 1
Experiments with 1⁄25th scale model of Olympias
The object was to find:
i)  the immersions of points of support from the ground, 
bearing on various positions on the after keel, at which 
the ship was neutrally stable;
ii)  the height above water of the ACU when the bow lifts 
from a 1 in 10 slipway;
iii)  the  upthrusts  at  the  ACU  at  various  points  of  travel 
while pivoting about ACU.  
===== PAGE 154 =====
17. On Slipping and Launching Triremes from the Piraeus Shipsheds and from Beaches 141
The model, made in 1983 to demonstrate the appearance of 
the reconstructed trireme, was shaped to an earlier proposed 
hull form of which that of Olympias is a not very different 
development, except that the keel in Olympias is deeper 
by 0.2 metre (8 mm in the model). Its main dimensions 
and displacement volume are close to those of Olympias on 
1⁄25th scale. It was therefore thought that some hydrostatic 
experiments could provide some useful indications about 
some critical stages of launching and slipping  Olympias 
to corroborate William Penney’s calculations and also to 
explore conditions for neutral stability.
  The experiments were made by a rig where the model 
was in a trough containing adjustable levels of water and 
a pivot point (attached to a brick on the bottom of the 
trough)  to  engage  with  the  keel  as  desired.  The  model 
was heavier than its scaled displacement, so, by means of 
a calculated weight and a lever, a constant upward force 
was applied to the model at a calculated point, to make the 
effective mass and effective position of the model’s centre of 
gravity correct to the scale of the model. The displacement 
was also corrected to allow for the use of fresh water in 
the trough for floating the model. The upthrusts at ACU 
were measured by applying an vertical upward force above 
the ACU by means of weights in a balance set on a stool 
over the trough. To obtain approximate measures of the 
thrust of the ship on pillars, vertical battens were placed 
on either side of the model in the plane of the pivot and 
the correct distance apart to simulate pillars with rubbing 
pads. Measurements of the model’s draft were taken fore 
and aft. 
  To  simulate  the  ship’s  travel  down  the  slip  without 
moving the ship, the model was placed with its ACU (16 
Station) on the pivot and its forward keel supported at 
the slope of the slip. Water was added to the trough in 
stages and the height of waterline relative to pivot, drafts, 
upthrust  at  ACU,  and  weight  on  one  outrigger  needed 
to cause the model to roll from one ‘pillar’ to the other, 
measured at each stage. 
  The model bow lifted at the same travel as calculated, 
after  allowing  for  the  shallower  keel  of  the  model.  The 
measured upthrusts at ACU were about 8% higher than 
calculated  (at  bow  lift  only)  but  followed  a  reasonable 
curve to zero at the point where the model floated free. 
Measurements   of  force  on  pillars  were  more  difficult 
because  as  it  diminished  to  zero  as  the  ship  moved  to 
the upright position, the starting value was not easy to 
identify;  readings  were  plainly  too  low,  but  though  the 
measurements are unreliable, the manner of variation with 
travel is clear.
  To  find  where  ship  stability  becomes  neutral  as  the 
position of support from the groundway is moved along 
the after keel and the immersion of the support to give 
neutral  stability,  the  pivot  was  moved  under  the  ship, 
its longitudinal position noted, and then the water level 
adjusted until the model appeared neutrally stable when 
upright. The points and their immersions are laborious to 
calculate with any accuracy so the model determination 
is  useful;  immersion  of  ACU  at  neutral  stability  was 
calculated to be 0.48 m while the model indicated (full 
scale equivalent) 0.57 m. These points are critical to the 
position of the ship where support from the seaward-end 
pillars becomes necessary. 
Annex 2
Some particulars of Olympias
Length overall: 36.8 m.
Breadth overall: 5.45 m.
Height overall (from underside of keel to top of aphlaston): 
  6.40 m.
Height of outrigger rail above keel: 2.43 m.
Displacement stations nos 1 to 23: spaced 1.6155 m apart 
(1 Station is near tip of ram).
At launching and slipping:
  mass, W: 25.0 tonnes.
  mean draft: 0.89 m.
  draft at 16 Station: 0.95 m.
  longitudinal centre of gravity aft of 11 Station: 1.87 m.
  vertical centre of gravity above underside of keel, KG: 
1.58 m.
After cut up (ACU) is at 16 Station.
Hull lines of ship, with displacement stations: Fig. 17.1.
Bibliography
Coates, J. F . (1993) Long ships, slipways and beaches. Tropis 
V, 103–18.
Coates,  J.  F .  (1997)  Some  comments   on  the  article  on 
shipworm  in  (and  beaching  of)  ancient  Mediterranean 
warships  in  IJNA 25.  International Journal of Nautical 
Archaeology 26, 82–83.
Coates, J. F . and Shaw, J. T . (1993) Hauling a trireme up a 
slipway and up a beach. In Shaw 1993, 87–90.
Coulton, J. J. (1977)  Greek Architects at Work; Problems of 
Structure and Design. Oxford, London, Elek. 
Blackman, D.  J.  (1987) T riremes and  shipsheds.  Tropis II, 
35–52.
Dragatsis, I. Ch. (1886) Report of the excavations in Piraeus. 
Praktika tes en Athenais Arkhaiologikes Etairias tou etous 
1885, 63–8.
Lovén, B. (2011) The Ancient Harbours of the Piraeus. Volume 
I.1 – The Zea Shipsheds and Slipways: Archaeology and 
T opography. Athens, Danish Institute at Athens.
Penney, P . W . (1987) Greek trieres – launching calculations. 
Unpublished.
Shaw, J. T . (1993) The Trireme Project. Operational Experience 
1987–90. Lessons Learnt. Oxford, Oxbow.
Tzalas, H. E. (1993) Were the “pyramidal stone weights” of 
Zea used as anchors? Tropis V, 429–454.
===== PAGE 155 =====
18.  Olympias Under Sail, and other Performance 
Matters: a practical seaman’s perspective
While  acting  as  Sailing  Master  on  Olympias in  1992, 
’93  and  ’94,  I  studied  the  question  of  “motor  sailing” 
closely,  comparing  the  results  on  Olympias with  a  great 
deal of experience of operating large sailing ships under 
sail  and  engine.  As  a  matter  of  semantics  I  prefer  the 
term “combined sailing” for what is done on Olympias, 
as “motor sailing” implies a level of relentless mechanical 
impetus which cannot be achieved by human power. Of 
most significance to this topic, and the allied one of rowing 
crew endurance, was the six-day sea voyage undertaken 
during the ’92 trials (see pp. 14–15). 
  There are two preliminary observations: the first, that 
Olympias has proved to be an excellent sailing boat, fast 
and responsive but well-mannered and directionally stable. 
While one might reasonably expect a long thin hull with 
relatively  small  wetted  surface  area  to  be  so,  Olympias 
exceeded my expectations. And the second, that the ship 
proved, within limitations, to be tough and seaworthy and 
capable of living in a seaway without visible distress.
Combined sailing
Timothy Shaw has given a great deal of closely studied 
detail  about  the  technicalities  of  combined  sailing  (pp. 
68–75) and there is no point in re-treading his ground. 
As a generalisation my conclusion is that there is a limited 
speed range over which using oars and sails together can 
bring the benefit of higher sustained speeds. Equally, the 
conclusions differ with whether the ship is close-hauled or 
running before the wind, as the mechanics of the action of 
wind over the sails differ. The basic principle is that sails 
work  as  aerofoil  sections,  attempting  to  move  into  the 
partial vacuum created by their shape and hence pulling 
the vessel they are attached to with them.
  When running before the wind, the sails act as a barrier 
impeding  the  free  flow  of  the  wind,  creating  a  partial 
vacuum  all  over  their  forward  (lee)  sides  as  described 
above. It follows that in light breezes even minimum oar 
speed will outpace the wind and cause the sails to hang 
slack, contributing nothing. My estimate of this minimum 
Douglas Lindsay
is  about  three  knots.  And  above  a  certain   speed  the 
contribution of the oars fades away rapidly, the oarsmen 
having to work excessively hard just to keep up with the 
vessel’s  wind-driven  speed  through  the  water.  They  will 
tire rapidly for minimal contribution, and above perhaps 
nine knots or so it will become actively dangerous to use 
oars. When under oars alone the vessel’s speed fluctuates 
with each stroke, and is geared to the drive from the oars. 
Under sail (assuming constant wind) the vessel is driven 
relentlessly through the water. At the catch, oarsmen will 
find their oar blades ‘snatched’ by the water rushing past the 
hull, with all the pressure on the front side of the oarblade, 
and my guess is that they would find their looms driven 
into their bodies before they can react to the pressure on 
their oars. While it would be interesting to experiment to 
establish  just  where  that  upper  safety  limit  lies,  we  had 
better have ambulances standing by when we do it. My 
own estimate is that seven knots or so represents the upper 
limit of comfortably safe and useful combined sailing.
  Due to a certain nervousness Olympias has only briefly 
been tested close-hauled, an omission which it is hoped 
will be rectified if and when a Mark II trireme becomes 
available.   But  working   from  general   principles   and 
accepting the limitations, discussed by Shaw (pp. 68–75), 
of heel on use of oars and the dangers of putting thalamian 
oarports  under,  a  few  conclusions  can  be  drawn.  The 
benefits of applying extra power to a vessel when close-
hauled come from the extra acceleration of the wind-flow 
across the fore face of its sail(s). This produces increased 
lift on the leeward side of the aerofoil section to produce 
two  effects:  one,  it  allows  a  sail  to  point  closer  to  the 
wind (typically, an extra point is gained and nothing has 
been  observed  to  suggest  Olympias would  be  different), 
and two, it provides a modicum of greater speed through 
the water. The combined effects reduce leeway and give a 
significantly better course-made-good.
  In  the  case  of  Olympias, the  benefits  of  “combined 
sailing” close-hauled could be gained from perhaps one 
knot of boat speed upwards, the impetus of the oars causing 
wind  to  flow  across  the  face  of  the  sails  allowing  them 
===== PAGE 156 =====
18. Olympias Under Sail, and other Performance Matters 143
to draw and contribute back to the vessel’s overall drive. 
Thereafter the benefits are the classic ones, enabling the 
boat to weather points not layable under sail alone and 
to make good passages which – at the least – would have 
taken longer under either propulsive system on its own. The 
upper limits of benefit are set by the vessel’s heel, a subject 
Shaw has devoted some consideration to. In practice five 
knots will be the absolute maximum before heel renders 
the  oars  impotent,  watertight  integrity  is  threatened  by 
approaching submergence of the thalamian oarports, and 
rising seas make the operation of oars too difficult to persist 
with.
  In 1992 a brief close-hauled sail took place. With wind 
on the starboard bow blowing between 10 and 15 knots, 
the  boat  (that  is,  the  fore-sail)  was  set  and,  with  three 
banks of oars pulling a speed of 3.8 knots was achieved, 
compared with 2.8 knots on easy pressure before setting 
the sail. With main sail set as well heel increased to 4º and 
rowing became very difficult on the leeward, or lower, side 
so it was stopped. After persuading the main sail to fill 
properly by rigging a bowline, a gust up to about 20 knots 
caused Olympias to surge up to 4.6 knots boat speed, and 
to heel to about 7°. At this the thalamian oarports were 
still clear of the water but it was felt prudent to take in 
the sails and progress resumed under oars only. During 
this brief period the ship laid about 60° to the wind and 
made perhaps 15° of leeway.
  One therefore has to conclude that “combined sailing” 
could  be  a  very  useful  close-hauled  operation  in  light 
winds, but that any form of progress to windward would 
become impossible at altogether lower speeds than would 
be the case with a fully watertight hull driven by wind 
alone. The accounts from the ancients seem to suggest that 
only occasionally were attempts made to force a passage to 
windward; in adverse weather the vessels were hauled up on 
the beach and everyone waited patiently until conditions 
were more favourable.
  A  minor  point  to  consider  is  that  the  ability  of  a 
square-rigged vessel to point to windward is not limited 
by  its  yards  per se , but  by  how  far  round  they  can  be 
braced. In modern-era square-riggers, designed above all 
to go down-wind, rotation of the yards has been severely 
restricted by the plethora of shrouds and fittings needed 
to keep the masts up. The evidence from ancient Greek 
times seems to indicate that the masts and yards of triremes 
were light, unstayed things; the heavy spars and shrouds of 
Olympias were not the original design, but added during 
construction to allay modern nervousness. It is to be hoped 
that in a Mark II trireme we would have the courage of 
our convictions to build the spars light and stayless; this 
way the yards might be braced right round through 90° 
and the Mark II trireme would point as close to the wind 
as any modern yacht.
Olympias as a sailing craft
There has been some discussion about the sailing abilities 
of  triremes.  Observation  on  Olympias suggests  that  the 
design  lends  itself  to  sailing  very  well.  On  the  last  day 
of the voyage in 1992, sailing downwind from Salamina 
towards  our  base  at  Poros,  Olympias surged  up  to  10.8 
knots  with  the  wind  25  knots  fine  on  the  port  quarter 
and both sails drawing well. This was by no means the 
vessel’s maximum possible speed and it would certainly 
be capable of around 12 knots, which corresponds with 
√L, but I had a feeling that the ship might do more than 
that (the maximum hull speed of any displacement craft is 
derived by the formula: square root of the wetted length; 
this, however is subject to some extending on extreme craft 
and it may be argued that Olympias with its exceptional 
length/breadth ratio and small wetted surface area, has the 
capacity to exceed the formula). Running before the wind 
in the Saronic Gulf, with short choppy seas, Olympias was 
entirely comfortable and my own speculation is that short 
seas will not trouble it; long oceanic sea or swell would be 
quite a different matter.
  Equally,  the  vessel  ghosts  very  well  –  perhaps  a  less 
important attribute with banks of oars available but the 
lightest  puff  of  wind  would  see  the  vessel  slip  through 
the water at a knot or two. Under sail, the ship remains 
stable directionally and even at maximum speeds has no 
steering vices when running free. Brief experience close-
hauled produced extreme weather helm and the ship was 
almost unmanageable. It is almost certain that this could 
be countered by brailing up the lee side of the mainsail, 
but  unfortunately  it  has  never  been  possible  to  sail  the 
boat  close-hauled   for  long  enough   to  test  this.  This 
problem was anticipated by Owain Roberts (1993) when 
he first designed and described the rig, and his preferred 
control method of tightening the central brails remains 
an interesting hypothesis to be tested when a trireme can 
be sailed close-hauled.
  During  trials  in  1992  we  deliberately  tried  Olympias 
under boat sail only, to test the view that this was all that 
was carried into battle as a means of escape if the oar crew 
were incapacitated. Running free before 12 knots of wind, 
Olympias managed  3.4  knots  and  sailed  perfectly  well. 
Close-hauled would have been much more problematic, 
however, and to escape by boat sail alone would require 
a safe haven to leeward of the battlefield.
Seakeeping qualities
Always  allowing  for  the  limitations   imposed  by  oars, 
Olympias proved  to  be  a  good  sea  boat.  On  several 
occasions during the 1992 voyage she was caught out in 
rough weather, and had little difficulty with it. As might 
be expected from a long thin hull the vessel rolled heavily 
when across any significant sea or swell, and this of course 
made  rowing  very  difficult  to  impossible.  But  head  or 
stern to weather, in short steep seas with breaking crests, 
the ship rode well.
  A conspicuous feature of Olympias’ design is the amount 
of wind-drag her honeycomb structure creates. The inside 
===== PAGE 157 =====
Douglas Lindsay144
of  the  hull  catches  the  wind  to  a  substantial  degree,  so 
much so that nearly two knots of leeway could be observed 
when the vessel lay-to across the wind. This contributed 
significantly to the extra work required of the oarcrew when 
pulling to windward, which was a tiring and dispiriting 
process. It seems unlikely that any of the record passages 
of antiquity called for pulling to windward or they would 
have been much less remarkable, even without taking into 
account the difficulties of pulling on an oar in a choppy 
sea.  Olympias’ high  scalloped  stern  was  also  a  major  air 
brake when pulling to windward and I have questioned 
whether, in extremis, the ancients might not have turned 
their craft stern-to the weather and sheltered behind it.
Crew endurance
As  a  contribution  to  the  on-going  debate  about  crew 
endurance, a day of the 1992 voyage might be illuminating 
(see p. 15). On the second day, with nine days’ training 
behind them, the crew took the boat from Aegina to the 
Eastern entrance to the Corinth Canal, a distance of 27.15 
nautical miles. Apart from the brief period when sailing 
close-hauled  was  tried,  as  described  earlier,  the  whole 
passage  was  under  oars  and  was  into  the  wind  which 
blew from 10 knots upwards. The first two-thirds of the 
passage was under two banks of oars, with a crew rotation 
of  40  minutes  rowing  and  20  minutes  out.  Olympias 
was slowly forced off to leeward and by early afternoon, 
with  the  Meltemi  blowing  up  to  25  knots  direct  from 
our  destination,  the  ship  was  struggling.  Speeds  were 
consistently below 3 knots. For a period from 15:31 hrs 
to 16:19 hrs, the thalamian oars were also used and the 
whole crew were rowing at full pressure for very little if 
any forward progress. By 16:19 hrs the thalamian oars had 
to be shipped in again as choppy sea had rendered them 
unusable. During this period a serious problem arose with 
oars  getting  caught  by  the  short  steep  seas,  with  crabs, 
oars stuck submerged, and oarclashes making consistent 
rowing impossible and equally meaning that the oarsmen 
were unable to pull full power on their oars. Just when it 
is needed most full power becomes impossible.
  Because of the difficulties with rotation, and the need to 
keep the vessel off lee shore islands, many of the oarsmen 
rowed without a break at full pressure from 14:13 hrs until 
16:47 hrs, when a tug took Olympias in tow – this effort 
after having done 40 minutes of each hour for seven hours 
already. The voyage recorder noted “crew tiring” and “poor 
timing” by 16:00 hrs. Despite this there did not appear to 
be any serious problems with overheating among the crew, 
nor of thirst, partly due no doubt to the strong (and fairly 
cool) wind blowing through the boat. And although more 
than a little weary, the oarcrew found the energy to row 
another 21 minutes from the north side of the Corinth 
Canal to Corinth harbour, after being towed through the 
canal and having 1hr 25 minutes rest.
  Based on experiences like these, it seems probable that 
toughened  professional  crew,  oarsmen  from  childhood, 
and  accustomed  to  living  and  working  in  fairly  high 
temperatures,  could  row  for  a  long  day  without  undue 
distress.
Bibliography
Roberts, O. T . P . (1993) Rigging the Olympias – a reconstructed 
trireme. In Shaw 1993, 29–38.
Shaw, J. T . (1993) The T rireme Project. Operational Experience 
1987–90. Lessons Learnt. Oxford, Oxbow.
===== PAGE 158 =====
19.  On the Speed of Ancient Oared Ships:  
the crossing of L. Aemilius Paullus from Brindisi  
to Corfu in 168 BC
One of the most contentious issues about the proposed 
modifications to the Olympias design is the performance 
to  be  expected  of  a  reconstructed  trieres  under  oar  (see 
Shaw,  above  pp.  63–7;  Wallinga,  below,  pp.  152–4; 
Whitehead, below pp. 155–60; also Coates, pp. 161–4, 
Rossiter and Whipp, pp. 165–8). In The Athenian Trireme, 
John  Morrison  attempted  to  provide  some  figures  for 
maximum   cruising   speeds   derived   from  a  variety   of 
literary sources. His conclusion, that 7 to 8 or even 8.6 
knots should be attainable, was based on recorded voyages 
where, even if the distance covered could be established 
with  reasonable  precision,  the  exact  time-frame  could 
not (Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 94–106, esp. 
103–4, 264–6). This paper considers what is probably the 
only voyage from antiquity which provides us with both 
a measurable distance and a precise time for the crossing 
undertaken, albeit by a Roman rather than a Greek fleet. 
The  significance  of  the  voyage  was  first  recognised  by 
Ernst Assmann (1888, 1622–3; cf. Schmidt 1893) in the 
late 19th century, but he did not explain its importance 
in detail and it has not been emphasised in more recent 
scholarship.
The crossing from Brundisium to Corcyra  
by L. Aemilius Paullus in 168 BC
In  the  summer  of  167  BC,  L.  Aemilius  Paullus,  twice 
consul, celebrated a triumph for his victory over the forces 
of Perseus, the king of Macedonia, at the battle of Pydna a 
year earlier. The celebrations were marred by the deaths of 
his two younger sons, one five days before the triumph and 
the other three days after. A few days later, he addressed 
an assembly of the Roman people in which, despite his 
grief, he recounted to them how he had won his victory, 
describing in detail his movements in the whirlwind final 
campaign (Diodorus Siculus 31.11; Livy 45.40–1; Plutarch 
Aemilius Paullus 36; Appian Macedonian Wars 19). In the 
version  given  by  the  Roman  historian  Livy  (45.41.3), 
Paullus begins as follows: 
Boris Rankov
‘Having set off from Italy – I moved the fleet out from 
Brundisium at sunrise – I put in at Corcyra at the ninth 
hour of the day, together with all my ships.’ 
Livy  does  not  make  it  clear  whether  the  voyage  was 
under oar, under sail or both, nor does he specify what 
types of ships were involved. It will be argued later in the 
paper that the passage is most likely to have been made 
under oar rather than under sail. We can be more or less 
certain, however, that a consular fleet such as this will have 
consisted of quinqueremes, the standard Roman capital 
ship of the period. In 171 BC, the praetor in charge of the 
fleet sent out from Rome to operate against Macedonia, 
C.  Lucretius  Gallus,  had  40  quinqueremes   under  his 
command, and when he sent ahead his brother – a mere 
legate – to collect allied ships, he supplied him with one of 
these quinqueremes (Livy 42.48.6–10). Similarly, in 170 
BC,  the  eight  (or  eighteen)  fully  fitted-out  ships  (naves 
ornatas)  sent  across  the  Adriatic  from  Brundisium  with 
2,000 troops aboard to join the forces of C. Furius, the 
legate at Issa, were almost certainly quinqueremes (43.49.5; 
cf. Morrison and Coates 1996, 110). Paullus himself, as the 
consul, may have used an hexeres (‘six’) of similar or very 
marginally better performance as his flagship (cf. Polybius 
1.26.11;  Livy  29.9.8;  Coates,  in  Morrison  and  Coates 
1996, 345 Appendix D estimates the cruising speed of a 
Roman hexeres at 7.1 knots, compared with 7.0 knots for 
a quinquereme of the same period), but the speed of the 
fleet would of course have been determined by the main 
body of ships. The quinquereme was a larger vessel than 
a trireme, with two men to an oar at the top (thranite) 
level, two to an oar at the middle (zygian) level, and one 
man to an oar at the lowest (thalamian) level, compared 
to the single man to an oar at each of the three levels of 
a  trireme.  It  was  thus  powered  by  282  or  300  rowers, 
compared to a trireme’s 170. Although, its flat-out speed 
in battle would have been significantly less than that of a 
trireme of the fourth century BC, the difference in cruising 
speed under oar would have been perhaps only half a knot 
(Morrison and Coates 1996, 296–303, 345 Appendix D). 
===== PAGE 159 =====
Boris Rankov146
The  average  speed  achieved  by  Aemilius  Paullus  in  his 
crossing from Brundisium (Brindisi on the Adriatic coast 
of Italy) to Corcyra (Corfu) should thus have been broadly 
comparable with what a trireme could have attained in 
similar conditions, and certainly no higher.
The reliability of the historical data:  
Livy, Diodorus and Polybius
What  makes  this  voyage  special  are  both  the  unusual 
reliability  of  the  historical  data  and  the  possibility  of 
calculating   the  average   speed  within   narrow,  known 
parameters. The source most often cited for Paullus’ speech, 
Livy, was a great stylist and story-teller but is not regarded 
as particularly reliable by modern standards, especially on 
military matters. He was also writing the relevant section 
of his history at the end of the first century BC, about 150 
years after the event. He does, however, have the advantage 
for the modern historian that in the later parts of his work 
he is frequently quoting (without acknowledgement) from 
passages of the Greek historian Polybius which are now 
lost. Indeed, at times he seems to have been translating 
word-for-word in a manner which we should now regard 
as plagiarism. 
  This is almost certainly what is happening in the passage 
in question. We know from comparisons with the surviving 
fragments of Polybius’ Books 29–30 that in his own Book 
45 Livy was using Polybius extensively. The speech is also 
recorded by other writers, in abbreviated form by Plutarch 
(Life of Aemilius Paulus 36) and Appian (Macedonian Wars 
19), both of them writing in the first half of the second 
century AD, and in detail by Diodorus Siculus (31.11.1), 
who was writing about 20 years before Livy. Diodorus’ 
version, in Greek, is very close indeed to Livy’s:
‘For he said that when he intended to transport his forces 
across from Italy to Greece, he saw the sunrise and then, 
having made the crossing, sailed into Corfu at the ninth 
hour, not having left anyone behind.’ 
It is clear that both of them are following a common source 
– who can only be Polybius – very closely (see De Sanctis 
1923, 371). In other words, it is reasonable to assume that 
Livy  is  giving  us  more  or  less  a  direct  translation  from 
Polybius, and that Diodorus’ Greek may be very similar 
to what Polybius himself had written.
  Now, Polybius was writing much closer to the events in 
question than either Diodorus or Livy; his Book 30 was 
composed sometime between 150 and 130 BC, perhaps 
only  a  quarter  of  a  century  after  Paullus’  speech.  Much 
more importantly, Polybius knew Aemilius Paullus and his 
family intimately. He had been hipparch of the Achaean 
confederation  and  had  been  taken  to  Italy  as  a  hostage 
in the aftermath of the battle of Pydna. There he became 
friend  and  tutor  to  Paullus’  two  surviving  sons,  Scipio 
Aemilianus and Q. Fabius Maximus Aemilianus, and the 
family inevitably figure very prominently in his history of 
the rise of Rome (Walbank 1972). There is every possibility, 
therefore, that Polybius had access to a text of the speech 
which  is  reflected  in  Diodorus  and  Livy,  and  he  would 
at any rate have known the details of its contents either 
from Paullus himself or from his two sons (who, moreover, 
probably accompanied Paullus on the crossing in question). 
  This is about as strong as ancient literary evidence can 
be, and there is no reason to doubt it either generally or 
in  detail.  We  can  be  absolutely  certain,  therefore,  that 
Aemilius Paullus claimed, in public and before an audience 
which  would  certainly  have  included  some  of  his  own 
troops,  to  have  made  a  crossing  between  Brindisi  and 
Corfu in nine (Roman) hours.
The distance from Brundisium to Corcyra
One of areas where there is some uncertainty is the actual 
distance  covered  in  the  crossing.  Fortunately,  the  outer 
parameters can be determined very precisely, and we only 
have a choice between three well-defined possibilities. The 
first commentator to use the Livy text for this purpose, 
Ernst   Assmann   (1888,   1623;   corrected   in  Assmann 
1923, 1054 on the basis of Schmidt 1893, 83), evidently 
calculated the passage to be from Brindisi to the ‘northern 
end’ of the island of Corfu, by which he seems to have 
meant the north-western tip closest to Italy. He thus made 
the distance about 170 km (= 92 nautical miles), although 
he also noted that Livy could have been referring to the 
actual city of Corcyra, in which case the distance would 
have been 216 km (= 117 nautical miles).
  The figure of around 90 nautical miles has been followed 
by  Casson  (1971,  292  with  n.  94;  cf.  How  and  Wells 
1912, 184; Köster 1923, 180; Rodgers 1937, 53 n. 57; 
Möhler 1948, 54 n. 26) but has the problem that the texts 
of both Diodorus (katapleusai ... eis Kerkyran ) and Livy 
(Corcyram tenui) imply that Paullus and his fleet came into 
land at this point rather than simply reached the island. 
There was, however, no obvious place for the fleet to come 
ashore in the north-western part of the island, since we 
know of no settlements there in antiquity where it could 
easily find water or supplies. Corcyra had, moreover, been 
a Roman-controlled island since 229 BC (Polybius 2.11), 
so there was no military reason to avoid the main ports.
  A much more likely proposition is that Paullus put in 
further along the northern coast at Kassiope, the only other 
port on the island apart from Corcyra itself. This town 
lay 104 nautical miles from Brundisium, at the island’s 
north-eastern corner, just before the entrance to the straits 
which lie between the island and the mainland of Epirus 
(we can discount the possibility that the fleet would have 
taken a route down the relatively inhospitable and sparsely 
inhabited western side of the island, which is dangerously 
exposed in summer to the prevalent north-westerly winds). 
Kassiope  is  a  strong  candidate  not  just  because  it  was 
closer  to  Brundisium  than  the  city  of  Corcyra  (which 
bore the same name as the island) but because it seems 
in the Roman period to have been the usual stopping-off 
point  for  crossings  between  Italy  and  Greece  and  vice 
===== PAGE 160 =====
19. On the Speed of Ancient Oared Ships 147
versa.  This  is  indicated  by  the  early  first-century   AD 
geographer Strabo (7.7.5.21 (324)), who measures the sea-
crossing from Corfu to the Adriatic coast of Italy between 
Kassiope and Brundisium; he gives the distance as 1700 
stades (170 nautical miles), which is clearly incorrect, but 
if the number was written in the original manuscript in 
numerals this could very easily have been corrupted from 
1070  stades  (107  miles),  which  would  be  very  close  to 
the real figure of 104 nautical miles. When Cicero was on 
his way back from Cilicia in November, 50 BC, he was 
detained  by  winds  at  Corcyra  city,  but  then  moved  on 
the 120 stades (= 12 nautical miles) to Kassiope, where 
he  was  detained  again  before  tackling  the  crossing  to 
Brundisium via Capo d’Otranto (Hydrous) (Cicero Letters 
to his Friends 16.9.1–2). Nero also stopped here on his way 
to Greece in AD 67 and sacrificed at the local shrine of 
Zeus Kassios (Suetonius Nero 22.3), and in the mid 2nd 
century AD, Aulus Gellius (Attic Nights 19.1) described 
crossing from Kassiope to Brundisium on his way back to 
from Athens to Rome. Today, the annual sailing ‘Regata 
Internazionale  ‘Brindisi-Kerkyra’’  instituted  in  1986 is 
raced from Brindisi to Kassiopi and takes place in early 
June, at almost the same time of year as Paullus’ crossing. 
The record time was set on 9th June, 2005 by the yacht 
Pegaso, which covered the 104 miles in 8 hours 7 minutes 
6 seconds; conditions were exceptional, however, and the 
race had been postponed from the previous day because 
of strong winds. The previous record, set in 1994, was 13 
hours 50 minutes 35 seconds, while times over 20 hours 
are the norm, and the slowest successful crossing in the 
race took place in 1999 in precisely 37 hours 30 minutes 
(see  http://www.brindisi-corfu.it).  It  is  easy  to  see  why 
Kassiope (which is not mentioned in any source earlier 
than the Roman period; see Philippson and Kirsten 1958, 
430) should have been chosen as the point of arrival and 
departure for Italy, since it avoided the necessity of having 
to  negotiate  the  straits  north  of  Corcyra,  where  a  ship 
might  be  delayed  by  unpredictable  winds  and  currents, 
on the same day as making the crossing itself.
  The  third  possibility   is  that  Paullus  carried   on  to 
the  city  of  Corcyra  itself,  and  indeed  this  is  the  most 
natural interpretation of the texts of Livy, Diodorus, and 
presumably Polybius. A possible objection to this, however, 
may be the distance which would then have been covered 
–  117  nautical  miles  in  nine  Roman  hours  –  and  the 
average speed which that would imply (see below).
  The  distance  covered  by  Paullus  was  thus  either  92 
nautical miles as a minimum, 104 miles to Kassiope, or 
117 miles to Corcyra city as a maximum.
The time taken for the crossing 
The  texts  in  question  are  unique  in  that  they  give  the 
time taken for the voyage with extreme precision – from 
sunrise to the ninth hour of the day. The Roman day was 
divided into 12 hours of daylight and 12 hours of night 
(see Mau 1886, 253ff; Bilfinger 1882; id. 1888); Carcopino 
1941, 161–168, esp. 167–168; Sontheimer 1979). Thus 
the length of each hour varied with the seasons and with 
the actual length of day and night. In order to determine 
how  long  the  nine  hours  in  question  were  in  standard 
modern hours, we need also to know the precise date of 
the crossing. By a fortunate coincidence, we are able to 
identify this date.
  In the speech recorded by Diodorus (31.11.1) and Livy 
(45.41.3–5),  Paullus  pointed  out  that  it  took  him  less 
than a month to put an end to a four-year war against 
Perseus of Macedonia, and gave a detailed account of his 
movements from leaving Brundisium until his crowning 
victory at Pydna. He took a day to get to Corcyra, four 
or five more days to Delphi, arrived at the camp of the 
Roman army five days later, and won the battle fifteen days 
after that, a total of either 25 or 26 days, depending on 
how one reads the sources. Livy seems to imply that the 
crossing was 26 days before the battle (after the crossing, 
five days from Corcyra to Delphi, five days from Delphi 
to the army’s camp, and then 15 days until the war was 
ended at Pydna), but Diodorus only 25 (four days from 
Corfu to Delphi, five days to joining the army, and then 
fifteen days to the battle). Livy’s fifth day (quinto die) after 
the crossing may, however, have been counted inclusively 
in  the  usual  Roman  fashion.  This  would  accord  better 
with Diodorus’ four days (τεταρταῖον) from Corcyra. It 
could even be argued that his fifth day (quinto die) from 
Delphi  should  also  be  counted  inclusively,  making  the 
crossing 24 days before the battle. It is Diodorus, however, 
who is the more likely both to have understood and to 
have accurately represented Polybius’ Greek, so 25 days 
is arguably the most plausible interpretation. The battle 
itself is dated by Livy (44.37.8) to 4th September, but the 
Roman calendar at this period was in disarray and out of 
line with the seasons; it remained so until Caesar corrected 
it in 46 BC (which had 445 days) and then introduced the 
Julian calendar (Suetonius Caesar 40; Plutarch Caesar 59; 
Dio 43.26; Censorinus On the Birthday 20.8; Macrobius 
Saturnalia 1.14.2–3).  We  would  not  in  fact  know  the 
‘real’ date of Pydna were it not recorded by Livy and the 
other sources that it was fought on the day after a lunar 
eclipse (Polybius 29.17 (frag.); Livy 44.37.8; Plutarch Life 
of Aemilius Paullus 17.7; Zonaras 9.23 with Dio 20.66.3; 
Justin 33.1.7). Since the eclipse can be dated to 21st June, 
168 BC (Walbank 1979, 386 citing Ginzel 1899, 191–2; 
id. 1911, 540, Tafel ii.2), the battle can be fixed precisely 
to 22nd June, 168 BC, making the Roman calendar some 
68 days in advance of the seasons at this date. Counting 
back 25 or 26 days from the battle, this would put the 
real date of the crossing on 28th (cf. Meloni 1953, 359; 
Walbank 1979, 378) or 29th May.
  We are now in a position to determine the length of 
the day, and therefore the length of the nine Roman hours 
in question. Since sunrise on the 29th May is less than a 
minute  earlier,  and  sunset  less  than  a  minute  later  than 
on  the  28th;  this  difference  is  ignored  in  the  following 
calculations,  which  are  based  on  the  times  given  by  the 
===== PAGE 161 =====
Boris Rankov148
tables in Brown and Cockcroft (1987, 119) covering 27th 
to 29th May. There is a small complication, however. The 
sunrise was of course observed at Brundisium, while the 
ninth hour would have been judged from the position of 
the sun in the sky at the point of arrival. Thus we will need 
to make minor adjustments both for the actual length of 
day at each of the three possible arrival points, and for how 
much earlier the sun had risen at Brundisium than locally. 
  The north-western tip of Corfu (39° 48' N and 19° 34' 
E), the harbour at Kassiope (39° 47' N and 19° 52' E), 
and the city of Corcyra (39° 38' N and 19° 52' E) all lie at 
more or less the same latitude, so their sunrise and sunset 
occur at the same Local Mean Time (LMT) to within 30 
seconds,  which  is  usually  less  than  variations  resulting 
from  the  relative  heights  above  sea-level  of  the  observer 
and his horizon. On May 28th or 29th these would be at 
approximately 4.36 a.m. and 19.19 p.m. LMT respectively. 
The local length of day on these dates is therefore 14 hours 
and 23 minutes, each Roman hour would be 71 minutes 
and 55 seconds long, and the ninth hour would fall between 
14.35 p.m. and 15.23 p.m. LMT .
  Brindisi (40° 38' N and 17° 58' E) lies 1° 36' west of the 
north-western tip of Corfu, and 1° 54' west of Kassiope and 
Corcyra city which share the same longitude. This means 
that Brindisi Mean Time (BMT) is about 6 minutes earlier 
than LMT at the north-western tip, and about 8 minutes 
earlier than LMT at Kassiope and Corcyra city. Thus, on 
28th  and  29th  May,  the  Roman  ninth  hour  would  fall 
between 14.29 p.m. and 15.17 BMT at the former place 
and 14.27 p.m. and 15.15 p.m. at the latter two places. Since 
sunrise at Brindisi was at approximately 4.33 a.m. BMT , 
the crossing would have taken between 9 hours 56 minutes 
and 10 hours 44 minutes to the north-western tip of the 
island and between and between 9 hours 54 minutes and 
10 hours 42 minutes either to Kassiope or to Corcyra city. 
Average speed over the sea-bed
From  this  it  follows  that  Paullus’average  speed  would 
have been between 8.6 knots and 9.3 knots if the crossing 
comprised the 92 nautical miles to the north-western tip of 
Corfu, between 9.7 knots and 10.5 knots if it comprised 
the  104  nautical  miles  to  Kassiope,  and  between  10.9 
knots  and  11.8  knots  if  it  comprised  the  117  nautical 
miles to Corcyra city. 
  We  can  perhaps  dismiss  the  higher  of  each  of  these 
figures – Paullus would surely have claimed the beginning 
of  the  ninth  hour  as  the  end  of  the  eighth  if  he  could 
do  so. We  might  also  allow  for  a  little  exaggeration  on 
Paullus’ part, or take the ninth hour as approximate, since 
the Romans tended to think in quarters of a day as well 
as in hours (as judged by the height of the sun above the 
horizon). Nevertheless, the speech clearly implied that the 
sun was still well above the horizon when the fleet came 
into harbour. If we were to extend our estimate of the time 
taken by a whole Roman hour, and bring it up, say, to 12 
of our hours, this would still produce average speeds of 
7.7 knots, 8.7 knots, and 9.8 knots respectively.
Sail or oars?
Even the most conservative of the speed estimates offered 
here would represent an impressive performance by Paullus’ 
fleet. Our lowest estimate – 7.7 knots – based on the most 
generous possible interpretation of our texts, would have 
been good enough to win the modern ‘Brindisi-Corfu’ race 
in all but the record-breaking year. The estimate which 
accords best with our historical data – 9.7 knots between 
Brundisium and Kassiope – is two knots higher and would 
have put Paullus’s fleet fifth even in the record-breaking 
year when sailing conditions were extreme. It is hard to 
believe that a whole fleet of quinqueremes under sail could 
have outperformed modern 40' racing yachts. 
  Moreover, it has been noted by Shaw elsewhere in this 
volume (pp. 68–71) that Olympias’ speed under sail was 
under half the true wind speed, astern or on the beam. If 
this is any indication of how a quinquereme might have 
performed, then the estimated speeds would have required 
true wind-speeds of at least 16 to 20 knots (8.2 m/s to 
10.3  m/s).  As  explained  in  Shaw’s  paper  (pp.  68–75), 
such north-westerly winds blowing steadily astern, with 
a fetch along the whole west coast of the Adriatic, would 
be likely to produce waves damaging and at some stage 
dangerous to long, narrow, wooden, oared warships. He 
calculates that a true windspeed of 8.5 m/s (just over 16 
knots)  with  a  fetch  of  200  km  and  a  duration  of  12.6 
hours, would produce waves of a significant height (i.e. 
average roughness) of 1.4 m with wavelength of about 28 
m, and three-hour waves of 2.5 m height with about 34 
m wavelength. This accords broadly with the conditions 
implied   by  our  estimated   speeds  for  Paullus’  fleet  if 
achieved under sail (i.e. winds of at least 8.2 m/s). Wave 
heights  and  wavelengths  like  this  would  be  almost  as 
dangerous to a 45-metre quinquereme of 1.5 m draft as 
they would be to a 40-metre trireme of 1.1 m draft (see 
Morrison and Coates 1996, 345 Appendix D). It is hard 
to believe that any quinquereme commander would set 
out if such conditions were threatening.
  These  considerations  suggest  that  the  average  speeds 
indicated could only have been achieved under oar.
Speed through the water: the effect of the wind
The  speed  estimates   produced   above  represent   speed 
over  the  sea-bed.  In  order  to  obtain  estimates  of  speed 
through the water, which is the true reflection of a ship’s 
performance, we must take into account the likely effects 
of wind and currents.
  The predominant local wind in the Adriatic in summer 
is the Maestrale from the north-west, and it is fairly safe 
to assume that it was blowing and provided Paullus with 
more or less a direct tailwind all the way from Brindisi 
to Corfu. Although the speed of the voyage makes this 
very likely, as has already been noted it cannot have been 
particularly strong for the voyage to have taken place at all. 
Moderate winds would in any case have been the norm at 
this time of year: the eighth edition of the Mediterranean 
===== PAGE 162 =====
19. On the Speed of Ancient Oared Ships 149
Pilot  (1957,  36,  44,  50)  tabulates  mean  wind  speed  at 
Brindisi as 9 knots (4.6 m/s) at 0800 and 8 knots (4.1 
m/s) at 1900 in May, and 9 knots at 0800 and 7 knots (3.6 
m/s) at 1900 in June; for Kérkira (Corfu city) it tabulates 
3 knots (1.5 m/s) at 0800 and 6 knots (3.1 m/s) at 1400 
in both May and June.
  It  is  reasonable  to  postulate,  therefore,  that  Paullus 
would have had favourable winds of perhaps 9 knots on 
his  morning  run  down  the  south-eastern  coast  of  Italy 
from  Brindisi  to  Capo  d’Otranto,  and  would  still  have 
been benefiting from favourable winds of around 6 knots 
in  the  afternoon  as  he  approached  Corfu. Tailwinds  of 
these speeds, which rate as no more than Force 3, Gentle 
Breeze, would have been ideal for fast, comfortable rowing, 
providing both moderate extra propulsion and cooling for 
the oarsmen. Conditions of slightly stronger wind would 
still have been rowable, up to a little under 11 knots (5.5. 
m/s), that is bordering on Force 4, Moderate Breeze (see 
Shaw, above pp. 73–5; since the lowest (thalamian) level 
of  oars  in  a  quinquereme  would  be  at  almost  exactly 
the same height above the water as in a trireme, Shaw’s 
calculations and arguments are directly applicable here). 
Anything more would at some stage of the crossing not 
have been rowable by the thalamian oarsmen.
  As  we  shall  see,  Paullus  would  also  have  benefited 
from favourable currents both between Brindisi and Capo 
d’Otranto and possibly also as he approached Corfu. These 
too would have been propelling the fleet and so would have 
reduced the effect attributable to the wind. We may, however, 
make an estimate of that effect in normal conditions as 
being the equivalent of a 6-knot tailwind over still water 
throughout, and perhaps of a 9-knot tailwind throughout 
if conditions were fresher than normal but still rowable. 
  T ests carried out on the Olympias trireme reconstruction 
in  order  to  calculate  her  wind  resistance  showed  that 
she  drifted  at  around  0.16  times  the  true  wind  speed 
(Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 32). The wind resistance 
of a quinquereme, which would have been about 1.4 m 
broader overall and about 0.4 m higher from waterline to 
deck, would have been greater, but so would the resistance 
through the water of her hull, which would have been about 
0.4 m deeper, 1.6 m broader at the waterline, and 5 m 
longer overall (Morrison and Coates 1996, 345 Appendix 
D). If we assume that a quinquereme would have drifted 
at roughly the same rate as Olympias, then a constant 6-
knot wind would have caused it to drift at around 1 knot, 
and a 9-knot wind at around 1.5 knots. In other words, 
we can assume that the wind contributed between 1 and 
1½ knots of speed to Paullus’ fleet throughout.
Speed through the water: the effect  
of the currents
The  currents   which  Paullus  would  have  encountered 
would also have contributed significantly to his average 
speed over the sea-bed. The general pattern of currents in 
the  Adriatic  is  a  counter-clockwise  circulation,  running 
north-westwards up the coasts of Albania, Montenegro and 
Croatia, and then south-eastwards along the cost of Italy 
(Pryor 1995, esp. 212 and the map on 206). Over the first 
40 nautical miles of his voyage, Paullus would have been 
able to make use of a favourable current between Brindisi 
and Capo d’Otranto, where with a good north-westerly 
wind it can reach a speed of 3 knots close to the coast. In 
the central part of his voyage across the entrance to the 
Adriatic (around 34 nautical miles), he would probably 
have encountered an opposing current of about ¾ to 1 
knot flowing westwards, but as he approached the small 
islands north-west of Corfu he might, if the wind was right, 
have been able to pick up an eastward-flowing current of 
about  1  knot.  If  he  proceeded  as  far  as  Corfu  city,  the 
underlying current in the straits between the island and 
the mainland runs northward at about 0.5 knot, but with 
north-westerly winds there is often a south-running surface 
current of about 1.5 to 2 knots (Mediterranean Pilot 1957, 
11, 13, 15–16: 3-knot current down the south-east coast 
of Italy; 13: ¾- to 1-knot westward current at entrance 
to  Adriatic;  14:  1-knot  eastward  current  north-west  of 
Corfu;  10–11,  164:  1.5-  to  2-knot  southward  surface 
current  in  the  Straits  of  Corfu).  These  would  represent 
the most favourable conditions of current which Paullus 
is likely to have encountered, and they are assumed for 
the calculations below. If Paullus in reality met with less 
favourable currents, then our estimates of the raw speed 
of his ships would have to be adjusted upwards.
Raw speed
On the basis of the above figures, wind and current would 
add 4 knots to the fleet’s speed for the first 40 nautical 
miles (assuming a drift of 1 knot attributable to the wind 
and a current of 3 knots), ¼ knot for the middle section 
of 34 nautical miles (assuming 1 knot attributable to the 
wind but an opposing current of ¾ knot), then 2 knots 
for the next 18 miles to the north-western tip of the island 
and the following 12 miles to Kassiope (assuming 1 knot 
attributable to the wind and a 1-knot current), and 3 knots 
for the final 13 miles to Corcyra city (assuming 1 knot 
for the wind and 2 knots for the current). If one assumes 
a fresher but just about rowable wind, then one can add 
0.5 knots to each of these figures.
  From this, one can calculate Paullus’ average raw speed. 
As we saw above, his average speed over the sea-bed can 
be estimated at between 7.7 and 8.6 knots for a 92-mile 
voyage, 8.6 to 9.7 knots for a 104-mile voyage, or 9.8 to 
10.9 knots for a 117-mile voyage. Taking the effects of 
wind and current into account, these imply raw speeds of 
5.8 to 6.7 knots, 6.7 to 7.8 knots, and 7.8 to 8.8 knots 
respectively (see the table in the Appendix to this paper, 
from which these figures have been extrapolated). If we 
were to assume a fresher wind throughout, then the raw 
speed figures would be about half a knot less,  i.e. 5.3 to 
6.2 knots, 6.2 to 7.3 knots, and 7.3 to 8.3 knots.
  Thus the most generous interpretation of all our data 
(12-hour voyage to the north-western tip of Corfu) gives 
an average raw speed of around 5¼ to 5¾ knots, while a 
===== PAGE 163 =====
Boris Rankov150
slightly stricter reading (10 hours 42 minutes to the same 
point) gives 6¼ to 6¾ knots. Taking the voyage to a more 
plausible destination at Kassiope results in 6¼ to 6¾ knots 
again (12-hour voyage) or 7¼ to 7¾ knots (10 hours 42 
minutes). If Paullus really did sail to Corcyra city, then it 
is possible that he could have done so at 7¼ to 7¾ knots 
(12 hours), while the interpretation which is most easily 
reconciled with our texts gives 8¼ to 8¾ knots (10 hours 
42 minutes).
Conclusion: the speed of ancient oared ships 
and the revised trireme design
This  is  of  course  a  broad  range  of  speeds.   Only  the 
interpretation   which   stretches   the  evidence   furthest 
comes close to agreeing with the 5 knots cruising speed 
suggested  for  triremes  under  oar  in  the  two  following 
papers (Wallinga, below pp. 152–4); Whitehead, below, 
pp.  155–60).  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  these 
calculations have assumed both optimal conditions of wind 
and current and that the oarcrews took no breaks at all. 
While such crews would undoubtedly have been inured 
to long periods of physical work at the oar with little or 
no interruption in a way which can hardly be imagined 
today,  this  is  still  an  extreme  requirement.  In  addition, 
the figures relate to a whole fleet moving together, and 
therefore  reflect  the  speed  of  the  slowest  of  its  vessels. 
The fleet also almost certainly consisted of quinqueremes, 
whose cruising speed would have been perhaps a ½ knot 
slower than a 4th-century trireme. Even this interpretation 
therefore suggests that the 5-knot estimate for triremes is 
definitely too low
  The more reasonable interpretations based on a voyage 
to  Kassiope,  and  even  perhaps  to  Corcyra  city,  accord 
very well with Shaw’s estimate of 7¼ knots for a trireme, 
based  on  the  passage  from  Byzantium  to  Heraclea  in 
Xenophon  Anabasis 6.4.2 (Shaw, above pp. 63–7), with 
John Morrison’s low-end estimate of 7 to 8 knots for a 
trireme based on this and other texts (Morrison, Coates 
and  Rankov  2000,  94–106  (esp.  103–4),  264–6),  and 
with  John  Coates’  estimate  of  7.0  knots  for  a  Roman 
quinquereme   of  100  BC  based   on  his  hypothetical 
reconstruction of the hull and oarsystem (Morrison and 
Coates 1996, 345 Appendix D). The figure of 8¼ to 8¾, 
knots which accords most closely with Diodorus and Livy, 
may even support Morrison’s top estimate of 8.6 knots; 
this does seem to be extreme for a fleet of quinqueremes, 
but it is difficult for historiographical reasons to rule it 
out altogether. 
  It is my conclusion that the voyage of L. Aemilius Paullus 
from Brundisum to Corcyra in 168 BC was most likely 
undertaken at an average raw speed through the water of 
around 7 knots. Given that this was clearly a performance 
exceptional enough for Paullus to have boasted about it, 
we may take this as representing the maximum cruising 
speed of a quinquereme. That implies that the maximum 
cruising speed of a trireme, which will have been perhaps 
½ knot higher (Morrison and Coates 1996, 345 Appendix 
D),  would  have  been  around  7½  knots.  That  in  turn 
supports the contention that the Olympias reconstruction, 
even allowing for any shortcomings in the oarcrew, has 
underperformed to at least some extent. It consequently 
offers further evidence in favour of modifying her design 
either by a simple lengthening of the interscalmium (cf. 
Rankov, below pp. 225–30) or along the lines indicated 
earlier in this volume by Timothy Shaw and John Coates 
(above pp. 76–91).
     
     
      
     












     












     












The Voyage of L. Aemilius Paullus from Brindisi to Corfu: table of raw speed vs average speed over the seabed
Appendix
Stage 1: Brindisi-Capo d’Otranto: 40 NM, current +3 kts, 
wind effect +1kt 
Stage 2: Capo d’Otranto-approach to Corfu: 34 NM, current 
-¾ kt, wind effect +1 kt
Stage  3:  Approach  to  Corfu-NW  tip  of  island:  18  NM, 
current +1kt, wind effect +1kt
Stage 4: NW tip of island-Kassiopi: 12 NM, current +1kt, 
wind effect +1kt
Stage 5: Kassiopi-Corfu city: 13 NM, current +2kts, wind 
effect +1 kt
Brindisi-NW Corfu (92 NM) = Stage 1 + Stage 2 + Stage 3
Brindisi-Kassiopi (104 NM) = Stage 1 + Stage 2 + Stage 3 
+ Stage 4
Brindisi-Corfu city (117 NM) = Stage 1 + Stage 2 + Stage 
3 + Stage 4 + Stage 5
===== PAGE 164 =====
19. On the Speed of Ancient Oared Ships 151
Bibliography
Assmann,   E.  (1888)   Seewesen.   In  Baumeister   (1888), 
1593–1639.
Assmann,  E.  (1923)  Segel.  In  Pauly, A., Wissowa, G.  and 
Kroll, W . (eds) Realencyclopädie der Altertumswisseschaft. Bd 
II A. Stuttgart, Alfred Druckenmüller Verlag, 1049–54.
Baumeister, A.  (1888)  Denkmäler des klassischen Altertums. 
Bd  III.  München/Leipzig,   Druck  und  Verlag  von  R. 
Oldenbourg.
Bilfinger, G.  (1882)  Die antike Stundenangaben. Stuttgart, 
W . Kohlhammer.
Bilfinger, G. (1888) Der bürgerliche T ag. Untersuchungen über 
den Beginn des Kalendertages. Stuttgart, W . Kohlhammer.
Brown, T . N.  and  Cockcroft,  A.  N.  (eds)  (1987)  Brown’s 
Nautical Almanac 1988 Glasgow, James Brown and Son.
Bursian,  C.  (1893)  Jahresbericht über die Fortschritte der 
classischen Alterthumswissenschaft (ed.   I.  v.  Müller) 
Zwanzigster Jahrgang. Bd 73 (1892). Berlin, S. Calvary 
and Company.
Casson, L. (1971) Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. 
Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988. Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea Trials of 
Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
De Sanctis, G. (1923) Storia dei Romani IV .1. T orino, Fratelli 
Bocca.
Carcopino  (1941)  Daily Life in Ancient Rome. London, 
Routledge.
Gardiner, R. and Morrison, J. S. (eds) (1995) The Age of the 
Galley. London, Conway Maritime Press.
Ginzel,   F.  K.  (1899)   Spezieller Kanon der Sonnen- und 
Mondfinsternisse für das Ländergebiet der klassischen 
Altertumswissenschaft und den Zeitraum von 900 vor Chr. 
bis 600 nach Chr. Berlin, Mayer and Müller.
Ginzel,  F .  K.  (1911)  Handbuch der mathematischen und 
technischen Chronologie. Bd II. Leipzig, J. C. Hinrichs.
How, W . W . and Wells, J. (1912) A Commentary on Herodotus 
Vol. II (Books V–IX). Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Köster, A. (1923) Das Antike Seewesen. Berlin, Schoetz and 
Parrhysius.
Mau, A. (1886) Privatleben der Römer (J. Marquardt and Th. 
Mommsen, Handbuch der römischen Alterthümer VII.1.2). 
2nd ed. Leipzig, Verlag von S. Hirzel.
The Mediterranean Pilot (1957)  Vol. III.  8th  ed.  London, 
Hydrographer of the Navy.
Meloni. P . (1953) Perseo e la fine della monarchia macedone. 
Cagliari, Università di Cagliari.
Möhler, S. (1948) Sails and oars in the Aeneid. Transactions 
of the American Philological Association 79, 46–62.
Morrison, J. S. and Coates, J. F . (1996) Greek and Roman 
Oared Warships 399–30 BC. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F . and Rankov, N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  Cambridge 
University Press.
Philippson,   A.  and  Kirsten,   E.  (1958)  Die Griechischen 
Landschaften. Bd 2.2. Frankfurt-am Main, Klostermann.
Pryor, J.  H.  (1995)  The  geographical  conditions  of  galley 
navigation  in  the  Mediterranean.  In  Gardiner,  R.  and 
Morrison, J. S. (1995), 206–16.
Rodgers,  W.  L.  (1937)  Greek and Roman Naval Warfare. 
Annapolis, MD, The United States Naval Institute.
Schmidt,   M.  (1893)   Bericht   über  Mass  und  Gewicht, 
Naturgeschichte  und T echnik, Handel  und  Verkehr. In 
Bursian (1893), 34–113.
Sontheimer, W . (1979) Der Kleine Pauly Vol. 5. München, 
Deutscher   Taschenbuch   Verlag,   496–497   s.v. 
Tageszeiten.
Walbank,  F .  W.  (1972)  Polybius.  Berkeley,  Los  Angeles, 
London, University of California Press.
Walbank, F . W . (1979) A Historical Commentary on Polybius 
Vol. III Commentary on Books XIX–XL.  Oxford, Oxford 
University Press.
.
===== PAGE 165 =====
20.  Xenophon on the Speed of T riremes
Herman Wallinga
In  the  discussions   of  the  Trireme  Trust,  Xenophon’s 
statement in the Anabasis (6.4.2) that it took a trireme 
a long day under oar to go from Byzantium to Heraclea 
Pontica (mod. Eregli) is a truly fundamental datum. The 
ability of a reconstructed trireme to maintain a speed of 
seven to eight knots for some 16 to 18.5 hours implied 
in Xenophon’s affirmation is declared to be ‘a necessary 
criterion of the authenticity of any reconstruction’ (Coates, 
above p. 82; cf. Shaw, above p. 67). The only reconstruction 
realised  so  far  has  not  come  up  to  this  standard:  ‘It  is 
acknowledged that Olympias is incapable of cruising all day 
at 7 to 8 knots under oar’ (Shaw, above p. 68). Proposals 
have therefore been submitted to ensure that any second, 
improved,  reconstruction  would  pass  this  test  (Coates, 
above pp. 82–91).
  This  implicit   trust  in  the  isolated   testimony   of  a 
writer not especially known for intimate association with 
maritime matters is surprising, the more so since at least 
one  ancient  reader  of  the  Anabasis vented  his  disbelief 
and convinced others, so that they broadcast his doubts. 
Xenophon  must  not  in  any  way  be  taken  for  a  naval 
expert. He never held any Athenian command, let alone 
a naval one, and a crass example of his lack of interest in 
naval matters is noticed by Gauthier (1976, 62). To this 
ancient reader I shall turn in a moment, but let me first 
say something about my personal reasons for surprise. I 
have never had any doubt that Olympias – whatever the 
possible (in fact unavoidable) anachronisms in the details 
of her construction – represented a very high standard of 
ship in the class of ancient triremes. In my view, the scaling 
up of what I considered a very well-constructed model (the 
one presented by Morrison 1941) would have resulted in 
a ship roughly as good as its ancient prototype, and this 
would certainly be true of a version much improved by the 
involvement of a modern shipbuilder of great experience. 
Moreover, my reading of the sources on naval warfare in 
the 5th and 4th centuries BC and on the use of the trireme 
leads  me  to  think  that  speed,  though  important,  was 
never paramount in the consideration of naval authorities. 
When, for instance, on the eve of the Peloponnesian War, 
Pericles  lectured  his  compatriots  about  Athenian  naval 
superiority (Thucydides 1.142f, esp. 143.1), he did not 
even mention the superior quality of the Athenian ships 
as such, nor of their rowers, but stressed the availability in 
Athens of experienced crews and especially of ‘more and 
better  steersmen  and  deck-personnel’  (no  need  to  hire 
them abroad). What is even more telling is the fact that 
speed is not in evidence as an attribute of any category 
of ship in the Athenian naval yards: ships are invariably 
categorised as ‘new’ or ‘old’, or (later) ‘first,’ ‘second’ and 
‘third’ (as in Demosthenes), and also as exairetoi (‘set apart’; 
see Morrison and Williams 1968, 248), designations that 
have nothing to do with speed.
  I have no doubt that the reason is that, in view of the 
co-ordinated movements required by their favoured battle 
tactics of diekplous and ramming, equal speed of all the 
ships – i.e. uniformity of build – was the chief aim of the 
Athenian builders. That is not to say that there were no 
individual  differences  in  speed  between  ships,  but  it  is 
very seldom indeed that this is apparent. The only clear 
case known to me for the Athenian navy is in Xenophon 
Hellenica 1.6.19.  In  the  situation  there  described,  the 
admiral  Konon  was  planning  to  break  the  blockade  of 
Mytilene by the Spartans (who had faster ships). To this 
end, Konon chose the two fastest ships – tas arista pleousas 
– in his squadron and took the best rowers from all his 
ships  to  man  them.  Here,  the  term  tas arista pleousas 
cannot have what in my view is its usual meaning – that 
the ships had very large or full crews – because Xenophon 
gives them this title before they were manned.
  In this context, and compared with the modest estimates 
in  older  studies  such  as  those  of  Köster  (1923,  125:  5 
knots ‘and more, but less as a rule’) and Casson (1964, 
31:  7  knots  top  speed;  both  Köster  and  Casson  were 
probably  using  information  about  early-modern  galleys 
derived  from  Louis  XIV’s  captain,  Barras  de  la  Penne), 
the speeds realised in the sea trials of Olympias appear to 
indicate that my prediction concerning the quality of the 
===== PAGE 166 =====
20. Xenophon on the Speed of Triremes 153
ship has been fully borne out. But then what to think of 
Xenophon’s testimony?
  A firm belief in its trustworthiness was in all probability 
already  held  by  Morrison  in  Greek Oared Ships where, 
however,  he  does  not  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  matter 
and  merely  specifies  the  speeds  implied  as  a  result  of 
different  assumptions  concerning  the  length  of  a  long 
day,  allowing   for  speeds  of  between  ‘less  than  eight’ 
and  ‘between  eleven  and  twelve  knots’  (Morrison  and 
Williams  1968,  309).  In  the  chapter  on  ‘The  speed  of 
triereis’  in  The Athenian Trireme on  the  other  hand,  he 
endeavoured to bolster Xenophon’s authority by working 
out the speed implied in Thucydides’ (8.101) account of 
the  Spartan  admiral  Mindaros’  dash  from  Chios  to  the 
Hellespont in the autumn of 411 BC, putting it at 6.9 
knots for ‘two continuous periods of 9 hours’ pulling and 
an overall distance of 124 sea miles’ (Morrison, Coates and 
Rankov 2000, 104–5, referring back to p. 97), seemingly a 
reasonable correspondence with Xenophon. But Morrison’s 
distances here cannot be accepted. He unnecessarily makes 
the Spartan fleet of some 73 triremes painstakingly hug 
the coast of Asia Minor between Arginusae and Harmatos 
(north  of  Lesbian  Methymna),  whereas  a  much  shorter 
route along the northeast coast of Lesbos was available. 
With this route, his ‘overall distance of 124 sea miles’ is 
reduced to no more than some 95 and the ships’ speed to 
upwards of 5 knots, still pretty good in my opinion (see 
now Wallinga 2005, 75 n. 15, and chapter 7 regarding 
the quality of triremes in general).
  Xenophon’s  testimony  therefore  remains  an  isolated 
case, and for this reason it deserves to be approached with 
due caution. It is, moreover, from a very special passage, 
not simply a passing reference in the succession of local 
depictions that is so typical of Xenophon’s great story. In 
Lendle’s recent commentary on the work (1995, 385), the 
account of Kalpes Limen, the place indirectly specified in 
the  passage  under  discussion  (6.4.1–6),  is  characterised 
as  the  only  detailed  ekphrasis  (‘formal  description’)  of  a 
locality in the entire Anabasis, meriting notice because it 
highlights features which would be vital in the context of 
the foundation of a colony. Xenophon (Anabasis 5.6.15), 
to wit, had toyed with the idea of settling the rest of the 
returning Ten Thousand on the shores of the Black Sea, 
in  this  way  ‘adding  territory  and  power  to  the  Greek 
world.’ Since the prospective colony, originally projected 
anywhere between Heraclea and Byzantium and only in 
the last instance at Kalpes Limen, would be surrounded 
by barbarian territory on the landward side, its sea link 
with  that  Greek  world  was  a  most  important  aspect  of 
its position. This link is in fact the very first feature of 
its location that Xenophon mentions: in his catalogue of 
facilities, it precedes other, more immediately important, 
features of the site like position, capacity, water supply, 
etc.
  In  the  context  of  his  colonising  project,  Xenophon’s 
ekphrasis cannot   be  denied   a  certain   propagandistic 
intention.  The Ten  Thousand  had  to  be  persuaded  not 
only that the colony was a basically sensible proposition, 
but even more importantly that it would be viable in the 
sense that, if its Thracian neighbours – victims-to-be of 
Greek  land  snatching  –  started  hostilities,  Greek  allies 
would  not  be  too  far  away.  Even  if  Xenophon  did  not 
fraudulently  minimise  the  distance  of  his  colony  from 
the Greek world, he may reasonably be supposed to have 
welcomed the low estimate of that distance when some 
informant let it slip, and refrained from verifying it.
  Now, this low estimate is precisely what appears to have 
provoked the protest of the ancient reader I referred to 
at the beginning. As Morrison noted in Athenian Trireme 
(Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 103 n. 4; cf. Shaw, 
above p. 63), there are two manuscript readings here, one 
measuring Xenophon’s voyage as a long day’s, the other 
making it last a very long day (hemeras mala makras plous). 
This second variant is preserved in two manuscripts of a 
class once know as deteriores (thus the Oxford edition), 
but nowadays of a much better reputation. Nevertheless, ‘a 
very long day’ cannot be considered equivalent to ‘a long 
day’ as a reading. No serious author would have used the 
expression in a straightforward account of the geography 
of a region. I have certainly never seen a parallel, and no 
recent  edition  prints  it.  I  have  no  doubt  therefore  that 
‘a very long day’ originated in some marginal comment, 
noted down by someone – most likely a Byzantine reader 
–  who  was  certain  that  the  feat  implied  in  Xenophon’s 
ekphrasis was too good to be true, his sarcastic mala (‘very’) 
in  fact  meaning  ‘impossible’  (a  judgement  which  may 
well be based on Athenian literary tradition lost to us). 
When his exemplar of the Anabasis was then copied, the 
copyists accepted his judgement and took the marginal 
note as a correction and incorporated it in the text, as often 
happened in ancient book production, to be multiplied 
in further copying.
  In  fine,  nothing  much  can  be  based  on  Xenophon’s 
statement. It is not confirmed by other reliable testimonies 
concerning the trireme’s speed and its origin and intent 
are too dubious for it to merit credence all by itself. In 
contrast,  Thucydides’  account  of  Mindaros’  dash  is  an 
incomparably superior testimony, not only because of its 
author’s far greater competence in maritime matters, but 
also  because  of  the  greater  precision  of  its  chronology. 
Making Mindaros start from Arginusae while it was still 
fully dark and arrive before midnight – in modern terms 
travelling from c. 4.00 to c. 23.00 hours with a one-to-
two-hour break for a quick early meal – gives him some 
17 to 18 hours to reach the Dardanelles. In other words, 
his speed over the 95 sea miles was between 5.25 and 5.53 
knots.  Compared  with  the  performance  of  Louis  XIV’s 
galleys – 5 knots per hour for the first hour; during the 
second only four and a half; after that ‘they dropped down 
to two or slower’ (Casson 1964, 121) – this is a magnificent 
exploit which was, as I understand it, not surpassed by 
Olympias. To my mind, it is a far better ‘criterion of the 
authenticity of any reconstruction’ of the ancient trireme 
than Xenophon’s pious fraud.
===== PAGE 167 =====
Herman Wallinga154
Bibliography
Casson, L. (1964) Illustrated History of Ships and Boats. New 
York, Doubleday and Company Inc.
Gautier, Ph. (1976) Un commentaire historique des Poroi de 
Xenophon. Genève, Droz.
Köster, A. (1923) Das Antike Seewesen. Berlin, Schoetz und 
Parrhysius.
Lendle, O. (1995) Kommentar zu Xenophon’s Anabasis (Bücher 
1–7). Darmstadt, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Wallinga, H. T . (2005)  Xerxes’ Greek Adventure. The naval 
perspective Leiden, Boston, Brill.
Used Elsewhere
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1941)  The  Greek  trireme.  The Mariner’s 
Mirror 27.1, 14–44.
Morrison, J. S. and Williams, R. T . (1968) Greek Oared Ships, 
900–322 B.C. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Morrison,  J.  S.,  Coates,  J.  F .  and  Rankov,  N.  B.  (2000) 
The Athenian Trireme: the history and reconstruction of 
an ancient warship. 2nd  ed.,  Cambridge,   Cambridge 
University Press.
===== PAGE 168 =====
21.  Triereis Under Oar and Sail
Ian Whitehead
Introduction
The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  examine  the  ancient 
evidence  concerning  passage  making  and  performance 
under both sail and oar of triereis. 
  Xenophon’s  statement  (Anabasis  6.4.2)  that  the  sea 
passage  from  Byzantium  to  Heraclea  was  “a  long  (or  in 
one version “a very long”) day’s journey for a trireme with 
oars” has been regarded as the clearest evidence provided 
for the speed of a trireme under oar (Morrison, Coates and 
Rankov 2000, 102–3; Shaw, above pp. 63–7) and as such 
is  considered  here  in  some  detail.  Similarly  Xenophon’s 
account of Iphicrates’ periplous of the Peloponnese is also 
looked at closely since this has been taken by Morrison 
(Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 97, 102–3; cf. Xen. 
Hell. 6.2.11–14; 6.2.27–32) to show that a trieres in a hurry 
travelled under oar rather than under sail. Other voyages 
undertaken  by  triereis  are  considered  in  an  attempt  to 
establish how a trieres might use her sails and oars to best 
effect both under normal circumstances and when she was 
in a hurry. Finally I have included a study of the actions of 
triereis breaking off from battle, since there is an undoubted 
connection between flight and the use of sails.
Byzantium to Heraclea
Scholarly debate over the “long day’s journey for a trireme 
with  oars”  has  concentrated  on  whether  or  not  it  was 
physically possible for a trireme to be rowed all the way 
from Byzantium to Heraclea in a day and on exactly how 
many hours a long, or a very long, day lasts (Morrison 
1991;  Shaw,  above  pp.  63–7  and  68–75).  It  has  been 
assumed   that,   whatever   the  arguments,   Xenophon’s 
account  describes  a  journey  completed  entirely  under 
oar.  However  the  language  which  Xenophon  uses  (καὶ 
τριήρει μέν ἐστιν εἰς Ἡράκλειαν ἐκ Βυζαντίου κώπαις 
ἡμέρας μακρᾶς πλοῦς ) does not rule out the use of sail. 
The dative κώπαις suggests that the oars are the means by 
which the journey is completed in a long day but it does 
not prove that the ship is rowed throughout the day. Oars 
are obviously important or there would be no reason for 
Xenophon to mention them but it is not possible to tell 
from  the  language  employed  if  they  were  used  for  the 
entire voyage.
  Xenophon  (Hellenica 6.2.27),  in  describing  another 
sea voyage, Iphicrates’ periplous, writes “but by making his 
journey with the oar  (τῇ δὲ κώπῃ τὸν πλοῦν ποιούμενος ) 
he kept his men in better condition of body and caused 
the  ships  to  sail  better.”  Again  he  uses  the  dative  case 
but we know from his own account that this voyage was 
completed  mostly,  but  not  entirely,  under  oar.  When 
Thucydides writes about triremes under oar he uses the 
verb  χράομαι  “use”,  which  takes  the  dative  case,  with 
κώπαις.  Hermocrates  of  Syracuse  talks  of  attacking  the 
tired  Athenians  as  they  approached  Southern  Italy,  “if 
they used their oars” (Thucydides 6.34). It would be rash 
to assume that Xenophon, in writing about the distance 
between Byzantium and Heraclea as “a long day’s journey 
for a trireme with oars” necessarily intended his readers to 
understand that the ship had to be rowed all the way.
  Thucydides sometimes measures distance by relating it 
to the time taken for a ship to complete a particular passage. 
Amphipolis is said to be about half a day’s voyage from 
Thasos (Thucydides 4.104). No type of ship or conditions 
are specified. In the context of the events taking place, the 
attempt to relieve Amphipolis, one might perhaps guess 
that Thucydides meant half a day’s voyage for a trieres but 
one can not be sure. From Abdera to the River Ister is 
described as a voyage of four days and four nights for a 
merchant ship if the shortest course is taken and the wind 
is  always  from  astern  (Thucydides  2.97).  Since  almost 
seventy  miles  of  this  journey  have  to  be  made  against 
the strong currents of the Hellespont and the Bosphorus 
the following wind is specified because it is important. A 
ship relying on sail to pass through the Hellespont and 
the Bosphorus would undoubtedly be delayed by adverse 
conditions (Severin 1985,132; Tim Severin, writing about 
the last age of sail, says that small ships were towed up the 
Bosphorus by gangs of men working from a tow path), and 
===== PAGE 169 =====
Ian Whitehead156
so the description would be worthless without specifying 
the following wind and the shortest course. The size of 
Sicily  is  defined  by  describing  the  journey  round  the 
island as a voyage for a merchant ship of not much less 
than eight days (Thucydides 6.1). This historiographical 
practice is continued by Thucydides’ immediate successor 
Xenophon and also by later writers (see Casson 1971, 287; 
cf. Diodorus Siculus 5.16.1; 3.34.7. Procopius Bell. Goth. 
3.18.4. Strabo 10.475).
  Xenophon’s statement concerning the journey time for 
a trieres from Byzantium to Heraclea seems to be in this 
tradition. He is providing a measure of distance but there 
are two difficulties in using this as a bald statement of the 
endurance and speed characteristics of a trieres using oars 
alone. 
  The first difficulty is that the statement is followed in 
the Anabasis (6.4.3–6) by a long description of the virtues 
of Calpe Harbour, which is at the mid-point between the 
two cities. The import of the passage is that in many cases 
triereis and their crews would find it too great a distance 
in  one  day  and,  since  the  natives  along  the  coast  were 
anything but friendly, they might be better breaking their 
journey at Calpe. 
  The  second  difficulty  is  that  the  language  Xenophon 
uses does not rule out the use of sail. Having oars may be 
just one of the conditions which enables the distance to be 
represented as being equivalent to one day’s journey: without 
oars it would under most conditions have taken two days. 
When Xenophon (Hellenica 6.2.27) describes Iphicrates’ 
periplous of 372 BC, he uses a similar construction and we 
know that sails were used on that voyage.
  If one looks at the nature of the voyage from Byzantium 
to Heraclea one can see that whether or not a ship had 
oars  would,  under  typical  summer  weather  conditions, 
make a difference to the number of days taken for the trip. 
Shaw (above, pp. 63–7) has shown in his very thorough 
analysis of this journey that a trieres making between 7 and 
8 knots would cover the 129 nautical miles of the journey 
in between 16 and 18 hours. Unless there was a southerly 
wind blowing, a ship without oars could not begin her 
journey north against the 1.5–2 knot current (Shaw, above 
pp.  63–4)  of  the  Bosphorus.  A  merchantman  trying  to 
make  the  trip  would  be  extremely  fortunate  to  catch  a 
southerly blowing early in the morning: a calm would be 
the most commonly encountered condition in the early 
morning. Any ship without oars would therefore have to 
wait for a suitable breeze to pick up in the afternoon to 
make progress against the current. Thus the journey from 
Byzantium to Heraclea would be certain to take more than 
one day.
  In the case of the a trieres attempting the journey, the 
typical  morning  calm  would  be  no  bar  to  her  progress 
since the sixteen miles up the Bosphorus could be tackled 
under oar with a fresh crew. This is perhaps why Xenophon 
used a dative of instrument in specifying the use of the 
oars. Once into the Black Sea she would use sail or oars 
according to the conditions. It would be most likely for 
the crew to need to row for eight to ten hours then sail for 
four to six hours followed by perhaps another four hours 
under oar. Shaw seems to quickly dismiss the use of sails 
without  oars  (Shaw,  above  pp.  69–73,  and  conclusion  
p.  75)  on  the  grounds  that  the  wind  speeds  required 
would raise waves which were too big for safe operation 
of a trieres unless the wind blew for only a short time. But 
this is precisely the summer pattern of fine weather both 
in the Black Sea and the Eastern Mediterranean (Shaw, 
above  pp.  64–5,  summarising  the  Admiralty  Black  Sea 
Pilot; Denham 1979, xxiv–vi) with the afternoon breeze 
expected to last four to six hours at wind strengths of Force 
3–5. Any trieres design must surely be able to withstand 
winds  of  Force  3–5  for  a  few  hours  or  to  my  mind  it 
would not satisfy the historical evidence. Otherwise we 
would surely hear in our sources of triereis seeking shelter 
on most afternoons throughout the summer!
  It appears that “a long day’s journey from Byzantium 
to Heraclea for a trieres with oars” can not be taken as a 
bald statement of the endurance and speed characteristics 
of a trieres under oar. Other evidence must be considered 
to illuminate the passage making qualities of triereis.   
The periplous of Iphicrates
In 373 BC Iphicrates replaced Timotheus as general after 
Timotheus had been deposed by the people of Athens for 
not setting out on the mission with which he had been 
charged. Iphicrates quickly manned his ships and, early 
in 372 BC, began his voyage around the Peloponnese to 
bring assistance to the Corcyraeans. Xenophon admiringly 
describes how Iphicrates not only succeeded in training his 
men during the voyage but also completed his periplous in 
good time (Hellenica 6.2.11–14; 6.2 27–32). Early on in 
his account Xenophon tells us about some of the measures 
which  Iphicrates  adopted:  “As  for  Iphicrates,  when  he 
began his voyage around the Peloponnesus he went on with 
all needful preparations for a naval battle as he sailed; for at 
the outset he had left his large sails behind him at Athens, 
since he expected to fight, and now, further, he made but 
slight use of his smaller sails, (τοῖς ἀκατείοις) even if the 
wind was favourable; by making his journey then, with the 
oar, he kept his men in better condition of body and caused the 
ships to go faster” (ἄμεινόν τε τὰ σώματα ἔχειν τοὺς ἄνδρας 
καὶ ἄμεινον τὰς νᾶυς πλεῖν ἐποίει) (Hellenica 6.2.27. trans. 
Carleton L. Brownson. Loeb Classical Library). Morrison 
(Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 97) translates the 
last phrase as “he both improved the fitness of his men and 
achieved a higher speed for his ships.” Warner’s Penguin 
translation is “he kept them (the men) in better physical 
shape and got more speed out of the ships.”
  Brownson’s  translation   of  this  passage  allows  three 
possibilities   concerning   the  speed  of  Iphicrates’  ships 
under  sail  and  oar.  Firstly  it  could  mean  that  since  the 
men were kept fitter the ships were faster under oar than 
they would have been had Iphicrates used his sails more. A 
long voyage made mostly under sail would inevitably cause 
===== PAGE 170 =====
21. T riereis Under Oar and Sail 157
rowers to lose condition, which would reduce the speed 
attainable under oar. The second, and perhaps the most 
natural interpretation, is that the ships were faster under 
oar than when they were using their small sails. The third 
possibility, which is Morrison’s view, is that the ships were 
faster under oar than they would have been even if they 
had used both their big and their small sails (Morrison, 
Coates and Rankov 2000, 97 and 103; it is not clear to 
me whether the  ἀκάτειον was used in conjunction with 
the big sail in addition to serving as a substitute for it: 
Casson 1971, 264–7 believes the ἀκάτειον was used on its 
own, while Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 175–6 
think the two sails were used together).
  Morrison  was  led  by  this  conclusion  to  suggest  an 
amendment  to  one  of  the  historical  requirements  put 
forward for the reconstruction of the trieres. “(9) To carry 
sail well enough for oars to be used on passage only in 
insufficient or contrary winds” (Coates and McGrail 1984, 
91) he thinks should be adjusted by the addition of “or 
when  the  ship  was  in  a  hurry”  (Morrison,  Coates  and 
Rankov 2000, 103 n. 3). All voyages undertaken in haste 
which we hear of in our sources are thereafter assumed 
to have been completed under oar, “since that was faster” 
(Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 105).
  However  when  we  look  at  Xenophon’s  account  of 
the  periplous  in  its  entirety  it  is  clear  that  speed  is  not 
uppermost in his mind. The big sails are left behind, not 
to make the passage faster but because Iphicrates expected 
to fight (Hellenica 6.2.27). The exercises which he puts his 
ships through are to prepare his men for battle (Hellenica 
6.2.28;  6.3.30).  The  emphasis  is  not  on  speed  but  on 
practice and preparation for a naval action.
  If we adhere to a more literal translation of the last few 
words of the first sentence describing Iphicrates’ periplous 
a picture emerges which is more in keeping with the rest 
of the account: “... he kept his men in better condition 
of  body  and  caused the ships to sail better .”  The  voyage 
under oar, by keeping the men fitter, made the all round 
performance of the ships better (for the present writer’s 
hypothesis  on  the  “better  sailing”  ship,  see  Whitehead 
1993). The double use of ἄμεινον  makes it unlikely that 
Xenophon means “better” when describing the condition 
of  the  men’s  bodies  and  “faster”  when  describing  the 
performance  of  the  ships.  It  is  more  probable  that  he 
is  using  ἄμεινον  in  this  way  for  emphasis,  highlighting 
the connection between the better condition of the men 
and the better sailing characteristics of the ships. We can 
probably still safely assume that the ships were faster under 
oar at the end of the voyage than they would have been 
had Iphicrates used his sails more, although that is not 
what Xenophon is telling us. The better sailing qualities 
acquired  by  Iphicrates’  ships  during  the  periplous are 
needed to enable his hastily recruited sailors to hold their 
own in battle against the well trained crews of the enemy 
(Hellenica 6.2.12 and 32; when Iphicrates’ men go into 
action they do so with great success). Moreover, since it 
has been shown elsewhere (Whitehead 1993) that “better 
sailing” is not synonymous with “faster”, we are not able to 
draw conclusions concerning the relative speed of triereis 
under sail or oar. Other parts of Xenophon’s account do 
provide evidence about the speed which Iphicrates’ fleet 
was able to maintain.
  The various training exercises which Iphicrates made 
his fleet perform must have increased the length of the 
voyage.  For  example,  drawing  the  head  of  the  column 
away  from  the  land  and  making  the  ships  race  to  the 
shore  when  landing   for  meals  would  have  made  the 
journey longer (Hellenica 6.2.28). Switching from sailing 
in  column  to  sailing  in  line  abreast  and  practising  the 
battle  manoeuvres  would  also  have  inevitably  increased 
the distance run (Hellenica 6.2.30). Nevertheless it seems 
that these exercises did not make the journey any slower 
than it would otherwise have been (Hellenica 6.2.32). Since 
Xenophon (Hellenica 6.2.27) includes leaving the large sails 
behind in his account of Iphicrates’ battle preparations, we 
must surely conclude that the voyage took no longer than 
it would have done if the ships had all their sails aboard 
and had been free to use them. Does this then indicate 
that Morrison was right to infer that passage under oar was 
faster than passage under sail? Another piece of evidence 
from Xenophon’s description of the periplous provides a 
possible  explanation  for  why  the  voyage  was  no  slower 
than it would otherwise have been.
  Iphicrates   trained   his  ships   in  the  various   battle 
manoeuvres by day (Hellenica 6.2.30). At the end of the 
day  the  ships  put  into  land  for  the  men  to  have  their 
dinner. It was normal practice for the sailors to sleep on 
land where they had stopped to dine (Thucydides 8.101; cf. 
Demosthenes [1213] Against Polycles 22, where Apollodorus 
complains  that  he  and  his  crew  had  to  spend  the  night 
anchored at sea off Stryme, without food and unable to 
sleep ), and Xenophon (Hellenica 6.2.29) tells us something 
of the precautions which Iphicrates takes to guard against 
an  attack  when  his  force  is  spending  the  night  ashore. 
Frequently however, Iphicrates does not allow his troops 
to sleep on land but pushes on through the night:
But often, if the weather was good, he would put to sea 
again after dinner; and if there was a favourable breeze 
they ran before it and rested at the same time, but if it 
was necessary to row he rested the sailors by turns.
The rowers would have been tired by the end of the day 
so it made good sense to sail when it was possible and give 
all the men a rest. However even when he could not sail 
Iphicrates still put to sea since it was important for him 
to complete the voyage in good time. These extra sessions 
on the water, executed partly under sail and partly under 
reduced oarpower, are surely the reason why the periplous 
took no longer than it would otherwise have done. The 
extra sessions were necessary because the manoeuvres had 
slowed the fleet, and perhaps also because the distance run 
under sail was less than it would have been if the big sails 
had been aboard. 
  The  number   of  unknowns:   the  increased   distance 
===== PAGE 171 =====
Ian Whitehead158
run, the time taken for manoeuvres, and the additional 
time on the water under sail or reduced oarpower make 
it  impossible   for  us  to  determine   from  Xenophon’s 
account of this voyage whether or not passage under oar 
was  faster  than  passage  under  sail.  A  consideration  of 
other source material and an assessment of the practical 
constraints affecting the operation of triereis in the Eastern 
Mediterranean may provide clues as to how a trieres went 
about making a fast passage.
Passage making
Summer   weather   in  the  Eastern   Mediterranean   is 
characterised  by  a  daily  cycle  of  sea  and  land  breezes 
separated by periods of calm. T rying to proceed under sail 
during a calm, or with an unfavourable wind would not be 
conducive to fast passage making. If on the other hand a 
trieres attempted to complete a long passage entirely under 
oar even when the wind was favourable, her crew would 
become too tired to row efficiently and her speed would be 
bound to drop. Moreover rowing with a tail wind reduces 
the cooling effect of the breeze which makes it a particularly 
endurance-sapping activity. Common sense demands that 
a trieres in a hurry was rowed in periods of calm, when the 
wind was favourable but very light, and when the wind 
was contrary; and sailed when the wind was favourable and 
strong enough to maintain a satisfactory average distance 
run. In reality all sorts of other factors would come into 
play. For example, a tired crew would benefit from sailing 
with a favourable light breeze in order to allow the rowers 
to regain their strength, in circumstances where a fresh crew 
might row on until the wind had strengthened sufficiently 
for there to be no drop in average speed when switching 
from oar to sail power. The evidence of our sources appears 
to support these assertions.
  Xenophon   (Hellenica   2.3.31)   relates   how  Critias 
attacked  Theramenes  in  a  speech,  telling  him  that  he 
should not turn around if he is hampered in his course, 
but should work hard, as a sailor would, until a favourable 
breeze  arises.   Apollonius   Rhodius,   who  had  lived  in 
Rhodes and Alexandria, although ostensibly writing about 
a mythical voyage in the distant past, sometimes provides 
anachronistic nautical detail which can be useful when one 
is trying to understand maritime practices of a later date 
(for example, his description of the fitting of a hypozoma 
to Argo seems more likely to relate to the larger warships 
of  the  third  century  BC,  triereis,  tetrereis,  and  pentereis, 
than to a Bronze Age pentekontor)
  We find that Apollonius’ Argonauts row when there is 
a calm but sail when the breeze is favourable (Argonautica 
1.600 and 607, 2.660). In Thucydides (6.34), Hermocrates 
of Syracuse suggests attacking the Athenian fleet if it makes 
the  crossing  from  Corcyra  to  Italy  under  oar  and  the 
sailors are tired out from rowing. Since this is a crossing 
of  perhaps  70–80  nautical  miles  this  provides  a  useful 
reference for what length of passage under oar would tire 
out the crew of a trieres. When approaching enemy-held 
waters a sensible commander would surely have used his 
sails if the wind was favourable, in order to preserve the 
strength of his rowers. Hermocrates goes on to say that if 
it did not seem wise to attack, the Syracusans could retire 
to Tarentum. One presumes that he would not recommend 
an attack if the Athenians came up under sail with their 
oarsmen still fresh. 
  Strong contrary winds (Apollonius Rhodius Argonautica 
1.586; 2.528; Herodotus 7.168), or a storm (Thucydides 
4.3.1; 8.99), might prevent a ship setting out or cause it 
to seek shelter. When he is not seeking to train his men 
Iphicrates sails when the wind is favourable and proceeds 
under oar if it is not. Since the oarsmen have worked hard 
all day they row in shifts to enable them to get some rest 
(Xenophon  Hellenica 6.2.29).  A  non-stop  voyage  from 
Piraeus to Mytilene also requires the rowers to operate in 
shifts. Thucydides (3.49) tells us that the ship was lucky 
not to be hampered by contrary winds, but during a non-
stop passage of this length, 184 nautical miles (Morrison, 
Coates  and  Rankov  2000,  95),  the  rowers  might  easily 
have become exhausted if they had rowed all together, even 
allowing for the possibility of a favourable wind and some 
of  the  passage  being  completed  under  sail.  Thucydides 
does not mention sailing in his account of the voyage but 
that does not rule out the use of sails. He describes the 
extraordinary measures taken to ensure maximum distance 
run when the ship is under oar, but since it is unlikely that 
any such extraordinary measures were required in order 
to sail most efficiently, he would have no reason to write 
about those parts of the voyage completed under sail.
  Long voyages undertaken in a hurry seem to warrant 
using  the  oarsmen  in  shifts.  Although  the  two  voyages 
mentioned  above  are  certainly  both  exceptional  in  their 
different ways, it appears that rowing in shifts was quite 
normal practice (Morrison and Williams 1968, 309–10). 
Polyainos (5.22.4) relates a story of the Athenian general 
Diotimus,   a  contemporary   of  Iphicrates   (Xenophon 
Hellenica 5.1.18–24), who landed a number of men from 
his ships by night to set an ambush for the enemy. At dawn 
he had his ships stationed offshore at the place of ambush, 
with troops on deck ready for action. He ordered those 
rowers  left  on  board  to  pull  in  turn  the  thalamian,  the 
zygian, and then the thranite oars. The ships attempted a 
landing and were attacked by the enemy, who were then 
taken  in  the  rear  by  the  ambushing  force.  There  would 
have been no point in rowing each level in turn if it had 
not been normal practice since it would only have made 
the enemy suspicious. Although there is no evidence in the 
cases of Iphicrates’ periplous and the dash to Mytilene of 
how the oarsmen were organised to row and rest in turn, 
the Polyainos passage suggests that it was usual for triereis 
to be rowed in turn by each of the three levels. The rowing 
of undermanned ships monokrotos and dikrotos, with one 
and two levels, at Aegospotami suggests that the sailors were 
familiar with the practice. In such a dire emergency and 
with no time to think they would have been unlikely to 
attempt anything unusual (Xenophon Hellenica 2.1.28). At 
===== PAGE 172 =====
21. T riereis Under Oar and Sail 159
Sphakteria the thalamians are left aboard the ships when the 
Athenians make a landing on the island (Thucydides 4.32). 
The way that our sources sometimes distinguish between 
rowers  by  referring  to  their  different  levels  may  reflect 
the  operational  reality  of  rowing,  resting,  and  (bearing 
in mind Aigospotami) eating in shifts (Thucydides 6.31; 
Aristophanes  Acharnians  162;  although  both  these  cases 
seem to be concerned with differences in pay). 
  On  another   occasion,   when   a  short   voyage   was 
undertaken without any need for haste, the oarsmen were 
handled differently. The Spartan admiral (nauarch) T eleutias 
sailed from Aigina with a fleet to attack the Piraeus. Since he 
had all night to complete his journey, and it seems wished 
to make his attack at dawn, he ordered his men to row for 
a while, and then to rest, and continued to alternate rest 
and rowing through the night. When he was a thousand 
metres or so from the entrance to the harbour he halted 
the fleet and let the men rest until daybreak. Then, as day 
was dawning, he led the assault on the Piraeus (Xenophon 
Hellenica 5.1.18–24). T eleutias’s method of handling his 
oarsmen was probably a more agreeable way of making a 
passage than rowing in shifts. It allowed all the oarsmen 
to rest together and they may even have found it easier to 
sleep without the noise of the ship being rowed (Morrison 
and Williams 1968, 311; cf. Aristotle  Meteorologica 2.9. 
(369b 10); Euripides Iphigenia in T auris 407, 1133). 
  In  the  virtually   tideless  Mediterranean   a  ship  that 
was  not  under  way  would  only  drift  with  the  wind,  so 
during the frequent calms no ground would be lost if all 
the rowers rested at the same time. T eleutias was able to 
allow his men to rest like this, probably taking advantage 
of the calm which usually descends on the Saronic Gulf 
at night in summer. During a daytime passage an astute 
commander might prefer to rest and then row his men all 
together through a hot, windless morning in the expectation 
of  help  from  a  favourable  breeze  in  the  afternoon.  In 
good weather the afternoon breeze starts about the same 
time each day and dies away towards dusk. Although its 
direction and strength may vary depending on the locality, 
a good kubernetes would be well aware of these differences 
and would know whether or not the wind was likely to be 
favourable.
 Triereis on passage used their oars during period of calm 
or to make progress against contrary winds. Long voyages 
undertaken in haste required the oarsmen to operate in 
shifts and it appears that it was not unusual to see a trieres 
being rowed by each level in turn. As an alternative the 
crew might be ordered to row and then allowed to rest all 
together if a ship was in no particular hurry. When the 
wind  was  favourable  a  trieres  would  proceed  under  sail 
although a strong contrary wind or a storm might prevent 
her from setting out or cause her to seek shelter.
T riereis in flight
Other evidence concerned with the performance of triereis 
under sail and oar, not connected with passage making 
but, in part at least, associated with haste, is provided by 
accounts  of  triereis  in  flight.  Manoeuvrability,  speed  of 
turn, ability to go directly upwind, and to go astern, were 
vital leading up to and during a sea fight, but once the 
decision had been made to flee, getting clear of the battle 
was the only requirement.
  When the Greeks at Salamis heard of the capture of 
the Athenian acropolis some of their commanders hurried 
aboard their ships and hoisted the sails to flee (Herodotus 
8.56). Following his account of Salamis Herodotus repeats 
a slanderous Athenian story concerning the alleged flight of 
Adeimantus and the Corinthians prior to the battle. This 
tale has Adeimantus and the rest of the Corinthian fleet 
hoisting their sails to make good their escape (Herodotus 
8.94). Although the story is probably false, for it to have 
had any credibility at all, ships in flight must normally 
have  used  their  sails.  At  Lade  the  Samian  ships  which 
turned  away  before  battle  had  been  joined  also  hoisted 
their sails (Herodotus 6.14). In all of these cases the ships 
had not sustained any damage, and therefore would have 
had their full oar power available, and yet they chose to 
hoist sail. Since the hoisting of sail served, rather like the 
striking of colours in a later era, to signal that a ship was 
not going to take any further part in the battle it is not 
safe to draw conclusions as to the relative speeds under sail 
or oar. However the sails must have driven the ships well 
enough to take them out of the battle line since otherwise 
they surely would have fled under oar without bothering 
to waste time by hoisting sail.
  Speed under sail must have varied according to which 
sails were being used. A ship using its big sail, or perhaps 
even both sails, would sail faster than one which was just 
using its ἀκάτειον. However in the three cases mentioned 
above  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  which  sails  were 
hoisted. Herodotus just uses the generic name histia and 
gives no clues as to which sails he means. Thucydides (7.24) 
only refers to sails once in his entire work and then only 
to remark on the capture of the sails of forty triereis from 
the forts at Plemmyrium. This does at least tell us that, 
by 413 BC, ships going into action were leaving sails on 
shore. We never hear of triereis making use of their sails; 
a  case  perhaps  of  the  commonplace  not  warranting  a 
mention. In 410 BC Alcibiades ordered forty ships under 
Thrasybulus and Theramenes to remove their big sails (τὰ 
μεγάλα ἱστία) and follow him to Parium (Xen. Hell. 1.1.13. 
cf. Lysander leaving his big sails ashore before Aigospotami. 
Xen. Hell. 2.1.29). Therefore we can be sure that by this 
date the smaller sail, the akateion, was being carried into 
battle since there would be no point in describing a sail left 
ashore as big unless it was to distinguish it from another 
of a different size which remained on board. Xenophon’s 
account of Iphicrates’ periplous in 372 BC is the earliest 
reference  to  the  akateion  sail  by  name  but  its  use  must 
have been well established by then. Although we can not 
be  sure  that  the  akateion  was  carried  into  battle  in  the 
early  part  of  the  fifth  century  BC  we  know  that  it  was 
by the end of the century. Since the only evidence I have 
===== PAGE 173 =====
Ian Whitehead160
quoted  concerning  the  hoisting  of  sails  for  flight  refers 
to actions from the early part of the fifth century BC we 
must consider later evidence to determine whether or not 
the akateion was used in this way.
  Epicurus   the  philosopher,   who  set  up  a  school  at 
Athens  in  306  BC,  when  he  was  35,  uses  the  phrase 
“hoist the akatia” (ἐπαραμένους τὰ ἀκάτια) metaphorically 
to indicate flight (Epicurus Frag. 163. ed. Usener from 
Plutarch Moralia 1094D; at Moralia 15D Plutarch uses 
the phrase “to hoist the Epicurean akateion” in connection 
with  flight).  Epicurus’  association  of  the  akateion  with 
flight suggests that in his time it was hoisted by triereis 
(and perhaps tetrereis too) wishing to break off from an 
engagement. It seems that even if a ship had left its big 
sail ashore it still fled under its akateion. This implies that, 
even with the reduced sail area provided by the akateion, 
sufficient driving force was generated to take a ship out 
of the battle line. 
  The evidence for flight under sail suggests that when the 
manoeuvrability needed to press home or avoid ramming 
attacks was not required ships would hoist sail to take them 
out of the battle line. Although it is not clear when the 
practice began of using the akateion as a battle sail when 
a ship needed to flee, it is certain that the akateion was 
used in this way by the end of the fifth century BC. Even 
under akateion alone a ship was fast enough to break away 
from the battle.
Conclusions
It  does  not  seem  safe  to  take  Xenophon’s  phrase,  “It  is 
a  long  day’s  journey  from  Byzantium  to  Heraclea  for  a 
trireme with oars” as a bald statement of the endurance 
and speed characteristics of a trieres under oar. The context 
of the passage suggests that, for many triereis, the journey 
would have taken more than a day. It may also be that 
“with oars” was included to indicate that oars will have had 
to be used to pass through the Bosphorus and therefore 
it is quite possible, given a similar use of the term by the 
same writer when we know that sails were indeed involved, 
that we could be talking about use of both sails and oars 
in covering this distance.
  It is not possible from Xenophon’s account of Iphicrates’ 
periplous to determine whether or not passage under oar 
was faster than passage under sail. Speeds under oar and 
under  sail  would  have  differed  with  changes  in  wind 
strength,  wind  direction  and  sea  state.  Therefore  it  can 
not be definitively stated whether it was faster to voyage 
under  oar  than  sail  or  vice  versa.  Ships  in  a  hurry  to 
complete long passages seem to have used their rowers in 
shifts. Other evidence suggests that if there was no need 
for speed the oarsmen could be used, and allowed to rest, 
all together. Triereis fleeing from battle hoisted sail and, 
even  under  akateion  alone,  were  swift  enough  to  break 
clear of the fight.
  The evidence of our sources, together with a consideration 
of  prevailing  conditions  in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean, 
point to the fastest passages being made under sail and 
oar, the exact combination of the two being dependent 
on the length of the voyage and the weather at the time.
Implications for a second reconstruction
The  points  raised  above  may  have  implications  for  any 
future reconstruction. Historical requirement (9) should in 
my view remain “To carry sail well enough for oars to be 
used only in insufficient or contrary winds” It also seems 
to me that it is not safe to demand that any reconstruction 
should be capable of being rowed by a crew of average 
strength and endurance from Byzantium to Heraclea in “a 
long day”. The context of Xenophon’s statement suggests 
that this was probably beyond many ancient triereis and 
their crews. Moreover since I hope I have demonstrated 
that it is likely that a trieres could be expected to complete 
some of the journey under sail we should not be demanding 
that our crews are able to row for 16–18 hours at between 
7 and 8 knots. In my view, in line with Hermocrates of 
Syracuse’s statement of the length of crossing using oars, 
about 70–80 miles, which would cause a crew to arrive 
tired, a trieres reconstruction which can maintain a speed of 
7–8 knots under oar for ten hours a day would adequately 
fit the historical evidence.
Bibliography
Casson, L. (1971) Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. 
Princeton NJ, Princeton University Press.
Denham, H. M. (1979) The Aegean: a sea-guide to its coasts 
and islands. 4th ed., London, John Murray.
Morrison, J. S. (1991) Ancient Greek measures of length in 
nautical contexts. Antiquity 65, 298–305.
Morrison, J. S. and Williams, R .T . (1968) Greek Oared Ships, 
900–322 B.C. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Morrison,  J.  S.,  Coates,  J.  F .  and  Rankov,  N.  B.  (2000) 
The Athenian Trireme: the history and reconstruction of 
an ancient warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,   Cambridge 
University Press.
Severin, T . (1985) The Jason Voyage: the quest for the Golden 
Fleece. London, Hutchinson.
Shaw,  T.  (ed.)  (1993a)   The Trireme Project. Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.  Oxbow Monograph 
31. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Whitehead,  I.  (1993)  What  Constitutes  a  “Better  Sailing” 
Ship? In Shaw 1993a, 91–4.
===== PAGE 174 =====
22.  Human Mechanical Power Sustainable in Rowing  
a Ship for Long Periods of Time
The  topic  of  the  cruising  speed  of  the  ancient  trireme 
has  come  to  the  fore  in  the  course  of  the  sea  trials  of 
Olympias (see also the papers in this part of the volume by 
Rankov (pp. 145–51), Rossiter and Whipp (pp. 165–8), 
Wallinga (pp. 152–4) and Whitehead (pp. 155–60). The 
project  has  in  particular  been  concerned  to  explore  the 
likely performance of triremes under oar and the accounts 
by Thucydides and Xenophon which imply respectively 
average  sustained  speeds  of  over  6  knots  for  about  30 
hours  and  during  ‘a  long  day’,  which  might  have  been 
up to as much as 20 hours in summer (Thuc. 3.49; Xen. 
Anabasis 6.4.2.).
  The Olympias   reconstruction  has  a  hull  the  sizes  of 
whose timbers and planking and method of construction 
are  based   upon  those   of  the  3rd-century   BC  Punic 
oared ship of similar size found near Marsala, Sicily. The 
hull  structure   of  the  trireme  reconstruction   is  highly 
stressed and is therefore likely to be of about the smallest 
practicable weight. The hull is as small as can accommodate 
the  recorded  number  of  oarcrew,  170,  and  30  other 
complement. The breadth of the hull is limited by the clear 
width of the shipsheds of the Piraeus and is no greater on 
the waterline than is needed to provide adequate stability. 
The effective power required to propel the ship at various 
speeds,  displacing  43  tonnes  fully  manned,  is  therefore 
likely to be near the minimum for a trireme which accords 
with the evidence, and for Olympias it has been determined 
with some certainty for calm water and wind condition by 
towing tests of a model and by towing the ship herself.  
  The effective power applied by an oarcrew in propelling 
the  ship  may  be  considered  to  be  the  net  mechanical 
power  developed  physically  by  the  crew  multiplied  by 
the  efficiency  with  which  that  power  is  converted  into 
effective propulsive power. That efficiency of rowing has 
been studied by Timothy Shaw in the context of Olympias 
and he has calculated that it probably lies between 53% 
and 55% in calm water and wind conditions.
  The net mechanical power able to be developed by a 
person aerobically is given by the rate of energy output 
John Coates
of the person multiplied by the efficiency with which it is 
converted into mechanical power. That efficiency, in effect 
the thermal efficiency of the person as a heat engine, varies 
with the rate of energy output between 25% at 40 watts 
(w) to 22% at about 200w. 
  The power developed, whether mechanical or the rate 
of  energy  output  (i.e.  gross  power)  varies  with  the  rate 
of oxygen absorption. A curve for measured mechanical 
power against oxygen absorption is given by Wyndham 
et al. (1959, reproduced in Scherrer et al. 1981, 12). The 
sustainable rate of energy output, or gross power, varies 
also with the period of time over which it is sustained, 
the maximum aerobic rate of oxygen absorption (MAO) 
of which the individual is capable, as well as a number 
of  other   physiological   factors,   such  as  body  weight 
and  constitution,   state  of  physical   training,   ambient 
temperature, humidity and ventilation. The gross power 
of  a  crew  can  vary  greatly,  and  that  variation  raises  the 
question of what gross power would the sort of trireme 
oarcrews manning the ships referred to by Thucydides and 
Xenophon have been capable, and hence of whether the 
reconstruction  has  the  right  power-speed  requirements. 
Conversely, if it can be accepted that the effective power 
required to propel a trireme at various speeds accords with 
that  required  by  Olympias,  and  that  the  efficiencies  of 
rowing and the thermal efficiency quoted are correct, the 
quality of those oarcrews may be estimated. Either way, 
sustainable gross power needs to be investigated if these 
reported performances are to be related to physical realities. 
Neither question need cast doubt upon the correctness of 
Thucydides or Xenophon.
  There are few data in this field. One source is  Précis 
de Physiologie du Travail by J Scherrer et al. (1981). This 
source  has  been  quoted  by  Burlet  to  give  three  figures 
for  sustainable  mechanical  power  for  ‘an  ordinary  man’ 
(Burlet, Carrière and Zysberg 1986, 198):
•	 140 w for 10 hours
•	 170 w for 4 hours
•	 200 w for 1 hour.
===== PAGE 175 =====
John Coates162
However, Monod in Précis de Physiologie du Travail gives 
the following figures for sustainable gross power for ‘well 
trained athletes and extreme performances’ for maximum 
possible durations (Monod 1981, 130 and table 3-VI):
•	 700 w for 10 hours
•	 850 w for 4 hours
•	 1000 w for 1 hour
These  figures  were  derived  from  measured  mechanical 
powers and then increased to give gross power by assuming 
a physical thermal efficiency of 20%. It will be seen that 
these figures are indeed five times those quoted by Burlet 
but refer to the mechanical powers able to be sustained by 
well trained athletes, and not by ordinary men as stated 
by Burlet.
  Monod then discusses maximum tolerable (as distinct 
from  maximum  possible)  and  sustainable  gross  powers. 
These are difficult to determine, he says, but recommends 
that in the meantime a few points should be taken into 
account:
•	 More than 50% of (maximum?) aerobic power cannot 
be developed habitually.
•	 An  energy   output   of  no  more  than  8,400   kJ/day 
for  professional  physical  work  over  many  years;  this 
corresponds to a gross power of 90w sustained over an 
8 hour day and applies to a well-built adult man.
•	 The time for which gross power exceeds 280w should be 
limited, to limit the total energy output/day to 8,400 
kJ/day. 
Monod  (1981,  133  fig.  3–18)  gives  values  for  thermal 
efficiency vs. mechanical power, thus:
Mechanical power  Thermal efficiency
  w    %
  40    25
  80    24
  120    23.3
  160    22.8
  200    22.4
These data were quoted from Galletti (1959), derived from 
cyclists whose mechanical power and oxygen consumption 
were measured. However, E. R. Nadel and S. R. Bussolari, 
in  The Daedalus Project   about  the  man-powered  flight 
lasting nearly 4 hours by a cyclist named Kanellopoulos, 
found thermal efficiencies in volunteers for that project 
ranging  from  18.0%  to  33.7%,  and  they  state  that  the 
reason for the variation is not clear (Nadel and Bussolari 
1988). 
  The  maximum  duration  of  exercise  as  a  function  of 
power developed is given by Monod (1981, 129 fig. 3–16) 
in  the  form  of  curves  of  the  percentage  of  maximum 
oxygen absorption at various sustained levels of exercise 
against the time for which that level could be sustained, 
for well trained and untrained people, after Astrand and 
Rodahl (1972). The curves pass through the points shown 
in Table 22.1
  On the assumption, neglecting base metabolism, that 
the  mechanical  power  produced  over  these  periods  is 
proportional to oxygen absorption, these curves show the 
importance of training in sustaining high levels of power 
for prolonged periods. 
  Maximum aerobic oxygen absorption, and, it must be 
assumed, the associated maximum short-term mechanical 
power  output,  varies  from  about  4.5  l  O2/min  for  fit 
young men (no doubt exceeded by exceptional athletes) 
to 3 l O2/min for ordinary young men and 2 l O2/min 
for women; it reduces to about ¾ of all those figures by 
the age of 60 years (Monod 1981, 121).
  Thus, for a period of 4 hours, the mechanical power 
capable of being produced by a well trained crew of fit 
young men would be (69/29) × (4.5/3) = 3.5 times the 
power produced by a crew of otherwise similar ordinary 
and  untrained   young   men.  As  ship  speed   is  closely 
proportional to the cube root of the effective power, the 
first  crew  would  maintain  1.5  times  the  speed  of  the 
second, both for 4 hours.
   A paper by W. V. Macfarlane considered cane cutters in 
Queensland working 9.5 hours a day to their physiological 
limit in dry bulb temperatures rarely greater than 35°C 
(Macfarlane  1981).  In  8  hours  they  produced  13,400 
kJ  of  work  energy  output  (compared  with  the  output 
quoted by Monod, 8,440 kJ/8 hours), which gives a mean 
gross power of 465 w, and therefore, at a conservatively 
assumed thermal efficiency of 20%, a mean mechanical 
power of 93 w. They drank 7.1l of water while working, 
and lost 2.6 kg of weight and 0.54l of urine; daily (in 24 
hours) they excreted about 9l of sweat and absorbed 9.6l 
of water. When not working they slept, apart from time 
to  eat.  Macfarlane  (1981,  284)  considers  that  capacity 
for work for a duration of 6 hours corresponds to 50% 
of  maximum  oxygen  consumption  (compare  with  59% 
for well trained men in the curves produced by Monod 
(1981) after Astrand and Rodahl (1972), summarised in 
my table above). Monod gives a maximum level of gross 
power of 700 w for 8 hours/day, presumably in temperate 






   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
T able 22.1
===== PAGE 176 =====
22. Human Mechanical Power 163
conditions.  The  difference  (34%)  may  be  the  effect  of 
the  high  temperature  in  which  Macfarlane’s  labourers 
produced 465 w.
  Kanellopoulos  (Daedalus  Project),  a  carefully  chosen 
and trained athlete, developed nearly 200 w of mechanical 
power for nearly 4 hours, during which he drank almost 
4 l of water-electrolyte drink, and could have continued 
for at least another two hours. 
  From  Thucydides’  account  of  the  famous  non-stop 
passage by a trireme from Athens to Mytilene, it may be 
estimated that an overall average speed of about 6.2 knots 
was achieved for a duration of just under 30 hours. The ship 
met no contrary winds and as the prevailing diurnal wind, 
the meltemi, is northerly and therefore a head wind broad 
on the port bow, sails could not have been used anyway, 
so the passage may be assumed to have been made under 
oars. Thucydides says of the oarcrew that some slept and 
others pulled (rowed), turn and turn about. The effective 
propulsive power required by Olympias at 6.2 knots with 
one rudder only half immersed, a clean bottom and in calm 
conditions is 6.2 kw. If, in pulling turn and turn about ⅔ 
of the crew rowed, each man would have had to develop on 
average 55 w effective power, or 110 w mechanical power 
(at a conservative figure for propulsive efficiency of 50%). 
Allowing an increase of 20% in required power to overcome 
the  effects  of  waves  in  the  open  sea  in  such  conditions, 
the  required  mechanical   power  becomes  132  w/man.
  The question now arises as to the best length of the 
‘turns’. Sustainable power falls progressively with the time 
for which it is developed (Monod 1981, 129 fig. 3–16). 
On the other hand, recovery during rest and sleep would 
presumably  increase  according  to  some  function  of  the 
time  resting  and  sleeping.  The  first  few  hours  of  sleep 
are termed paradoxal and are understood to be the most 
valuable. Paradoxal sleep lasts for about two hours, so it 
seems at first sight (but this needs to be investigated) that 
a regime of 2 hours rest and sleeping, being the shortest 
of high value in achieving recovery, and therefore 4 hours 
rowing may be the best means for an oarcrew to maintain 
the highest power for many hours on end. 
  If  men  rowed  in  turns  for  4  hours  and  slept  for  2 
hours, the curves from Monod show that they could have 
maintained  69%  of  their  maximum  aerobic  output  for 
4 hours. If they were trained oarsmen, their MAO may, 
even in ancient Athens, be assumed to have been at least 
3.1 lO2/min corresponding (Monod 1981, 120 fig. 3–8) 
to  a  mechanical  power  of  250  w,  so,  as  69%  of  that  is 
172 w, it seems that the average speed could have been 
maintained by ⅔ of the crew at a time with a margin of 
40w/man to spare. However, that takes no account of the 
effects of ambient temperature, which, if 34% as derived 
above (Macfarlane 1981) for high temperatures up to 35°C, 
would reduce the 172 w to 114 w. As however about half 
the passage would have been carried out at night and in 
the cooler conditions at the end and start of the day, that 
figure could be reduced by say half, to 17%, making the 
average mechanical output 172 × 0.83 = 142 w, 10 w more 
than the estimated required average of 132 w. If the oarcrew 
were the physiological equivalents of Macfarlane’s sugarcane 
cutters in the same hot conditions and capable of 13,400 
kJ/8 hours compared with 8,400 kJ/8 hours quoted for 
professional labour by Monod, they could have developed 
about 9% less power in the heat of the day for the 4 hour 
period,  i.e.  about  160w,  well  sufficient  for  6.2  knots.  If 
however the oarcrew had an MAO of 3.1 lO2/min but were 
not trained, they could, by the same curve, develop only 
29% of 250 w, i.e. 72 w of mechanical power, insufficient 
for 6.2 knots by the above assumptions, but only enough 
for 5.1 knots. If of MAO of 4 lO2/min but untrained they 
could have developed 4/3 × 72 w = 96 w, sufficient for 
5.6 knots, showing the importance of training to sustained 
performance (as is also clear in the same curve). 
  The conclusion from the use of the data in Monod and 
Macfarlane, which omit verification of the physiological 
practicality of a regime of 4 hours’ rowing and two hours’ 
rest (sleep), must be that Thucydides’ account is credible 
for an oarcrew of men below about 30 years of age and 
capable  of  a  fairly  commonly  achieved  MAO  of  3.1  l 
O2/min  provided  that  they  were  physically  trained  (or 
habituated  to  sustained  physical  work). T raining  is  the 
critical factor.
  The 129 sea miles between Byzantium and Heraclea, 
which  Xenophon  states  to  be  a  long  day’s  voyage  for  a 
trireme under oar, could have been performed if the same 
assumptions above were valid (including a 20% allowance 
for extra power required to cope with sea conditions but 
neglecting the currents examined by Shaw on pp. 63–5 
above) in 20 hours continuously.
  Whether the 4 hour/2 hour work/rest regime suggested 
here is physiologically the best is unresolved and needs to 
be investigated. It is likely that long experience in rowing 
ships would have led the ancients to adopt a practice which 
would have been near the optimum.
  Rest  periods   of  about  two  hours  seem  sufficient, 
according   to  Monod  and  Sanchez   (1981,   154,  156) 
for  digestion  of  food  if  taken,  as  it  would  have  been, 
immediately after a four-hour period of rowing. In a 4/2 
hour regime, there would be a necessary pause in rowing 
every 2 hours when some food and water could be taken 
by  those  remaining  at  their  oars  for  another  two  hours 
and  by  those  having  just  woken  up,  maintaining  the 
optimum 2-hour period between intakes of food (Monod 
and Sanchez 1981). Thucydides wrote that the crew made 
such haste that they pulled and ate at the same time barley 
bread mixed with wine and olive oil, a suitable food rich 
in  carbohydrates  to  supply  energy  relatively  quickly.  A 
two-hour rest period would have been sufficient nearly to 
complete the most valuable paradoxal phase of a sleeping 
period, but may not have been sufficient for other aspects 
of  recovery.  During  a  30-hour  passage  with  the  crew 
rotating in a 4/2 hour regime there would have been five 
complete rotations, giving each third of the crew a total 
of 10 hours rest and sleep, and 20 hours rowing.  
  It looks, by these data and assumptions, and provided 
===== PAGE 177 =====
John Coates164
that recovery in 2 hours was sufficient for repeating rowing 
performance for successive periods of 4 hours, that if a 
modern scratch crew of young, fit, but untrained men with 
MAOs of 3.1 l O2/min, with ⅔ rowing, could maintain 
5.1 knots in a Mark IIb trireme reconstruction ( see Shaw, 
pp. 76–81 above) with a smooth bottom for 4 hours in 
calm conditions, they would indirectly have established the 
feasibility of the non-stop passage to Mytilene by trained 
oarsmen with an MAO of 3.1 l O2/min of the non-stop 
passage  to  Mytilene  as  described  by  Thucydides  and  a 
20-hour interpretation of Xenophon’s ‘long day’ to make 
the passage from Byzantium to Heraclea. It seems that the 
maximum speed achieved in Olympias in a short sprint 
was about 8.5 knots instead of the hoped-for 9.7 knots, a 
shortfall of 12% in speed and about 33% in power. If that 
shortfall was due entirely to the oar rig of Olympias (though 
her crews on sea trials were by no means all trained nor 
all-male), the above feasibility would be established if an 
average speed of 4.5 knots could be achieved in Olympias 
by such a modern crew. The corresponding speed for a 
trained crew of men with MAOs of 3.1 l O2/min would 
be 4.5 × (69/29)1/3 = 6.0 knots.
Bibliography
Astrand, P . O. and Rodahl, K. (1972) Manuel de physiologie 
de l’exercice musculaire ,  French transl.  of  Manual of the 
Physiology of Muscular Exercise. Paris, Masson et Cie.
Burlet, R., Carrière, J. and Zysberg, A. (1986) Mais comment 
pouvait-on ramer sur les galères du Roi-Soleil? Histoire et 
Mesure 1.3/4,147–208.
Galletti,  P .  M.  (1959)  Les  échanges  respiratoires  pendant 
l’exercice musculaire. Helvetica Physiologica et Pharmacologica 
Acta 17, 34–61. 
Macfarlane,  W.  V.  (1981)  Vie  et  travail  dans  les  climats 
chauds. In Scerrer et al. 1981, 265–289. 
Monod, H. (1981) Défense énergétique chez  l’homme. In 
Scherrer et al. 1981, 107–138.
Monod, H. and Sanchez, J. (1981) Besoins énergétiques de 
l’homme au travail. In Scherrer et al. 1981, 139–158.
Nadel, E. R. and Bussolari, S. R. (1988) The Daedalus Project: 
Physiological Problems and Solutions. American Scientist 
(July–August), 351–360.
Scherrer, J. et al. (1981) Précis de physiologie du travail, notions 
d’ergonomie. 2nd ed. Paris, Masson et Cie.
Wyndham, C. H., Strydom, N. B., Maritz, J. S., Morrison, J. 
F ., Peter, J., and Potgeiter, Z. U. (1959) Maximum oxygen 
intake and maximum heart rate during strenuous work. 
Journal of Applied Physiology 14, 927–936.
===== PAGE 178 =====
23.  Paleo-bioenergetics: clues to the maximum 
sustainable speed of a trireme under oar
Introduction
The major impediment to establishing plausible estimates 
for  the  metabolic   demands,   or  limits,   of  sustained 
high-energy  activities  for  ancient  cultures  is  the  lack  of 
information regarding the actual work rates undertaken. As 
much of the discussion at the Oxford/Henley conference 
in  1998  was  directed  towards  the  literary  evidence  for 
the  maximum  sustainable  speed  of  the  ancient  trieres, 
the  human  limitations  to  the  production  of  power  for 
movement of the warship are highly relevant. Statements 
by  Xenophon  (Anabasis  6.4.2)  and  Thucydides  (3.49), 
for example, provide literary examples of the speed of the 
trieres under  oar  (although  there  is  considerable  debate 
about  the  validity  of  such  statements).  It  is  therefore 
salient  to  consider  the  physiological  limitations  of  the 
‘human engine.’
  Our  understanding  of  the  bioenergetics  of  sustained 
muscular work provides the potential for calculating the 
maximum sustainable power output by the oarsmen for 
the  considerable  speeds  and  distances  required  by  the 
literary evidence (e.g. ~7 knots for ~18 hours, based on 
Thucydides 3.49; 8.101; Xenophon Anabasis 6.4.2). These 
estimates can be used to support or refute the plausibility 
of the literary evidence and consequently the justification 
for the Olympias reconstruction. Furthermore, plausible 
extimates for the maximum sustainable power output (in 
watts) may be applied to the relevant range of movement 
and mechanical efficiency of the Olympias or with respect 
to an, as yet unreconstructed, theoretical Mk II ship. The 
physiological and bio-energetic limitations to long duration 
exercise (such as oxygen delivery, substrate provision to the 
working  muscle,  as  well  as  fluid  and  thermoregulatory 
balance, for example) may provide a window into better 
understanding the plausible maximum speeds of ancient 
triereis. Direct measurement of the relevant physiological 
variables, both in the laboratory and from Olympias herself, 
would provide experimental support for these theoretical 
calculations.
Harry Rossiter and Brian Whipp
The basis of exercise bio-energetics
Skeletal muscle may be considered to be a machine that is 
fuelled by the chemical energy of substrates derived from 
ingested food and stored as carbohydrates and lipids in 
the body. Protein is also a viable energy source but is not 
used to fuel energy requirements to any appreciable extent, 
except under extreme conditions such as starvation. Energy 
for  muscular  contraction  is  obtained  predominantly  by 
the  oxidation  of  the  substrate  (carbohydrate  or  lipid). 
The  free  energy  of  these  substrates  (i.e.  that  fraction  of 
the total chemical energy that is capable of doing work) 
is  not  directly  used  for  muscle  contraction  as  it  must 
first be stored as the bond energy of the muscles’ “high-
energy”  phosphate  pool  (adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP) 
and  creatine   phosphate   (PCr)).   Exercise   requires   an 
acceleration of “high-energy” phosphate bond utilisation 
with  their  concentration  being  replenished  through  an 
increased oxygen (O2) utilisation rate; this occurs with a 
simultaneous increase in the removal of carbon dioxide 
(CO2), the major catabolic end-product of exercise.
  In the simplest case, carbohydrate is metabolised (with 
sufficient O2 supply) such that each glycosyl unit provides 
the muscle cell with 37 ATP molecules at a cost of 6 O2 
molecules utilised. Here the amount O2 consumed and 
the  CO2  produced  are  equal  and  thus  the  respiratory 
quotient (RQ) in the muscle is 1.0. When the metabolite 
is purely lipid, 130 ATP molecules are produced for the 
consumption of 23 O2 molecules, resulting in an RQ of 
0.71. These processes are termed aerobic metabolism. As 
work rate increases during exercise, the fuel mixture derives 
proportionally more from carbohydrate than from lipid. 
This is reflected in the muscle RQ, which can be measured 
under  appropriate  circumstances   from  pulmonary  gas 
exchange  as  the  respiratory   exchange  ratio  (RER:  the 
rates of carbon dioxide output divided by oxygen uptake; 
V̇CO2/V̇O2).  This  allows  the  proportional  utilisation  of 
carbohydrate and lipid to be determined, i.e. percentage 
carbohydrate utilisation = (RQ – 0.7)/(0.3). The “average 
western  diet”  produces  a  resting  RER  of  approximately 
===== PAGE 179 =====
Harry Rossiter and Brian Whipp166
0.8 indicating that about 33% of the energy utilisation is 
derived from carbohydrate metabolism. This is significant 
to the present consideration of very long duration exercise, 
as the stores of carbohydrate (glycogen and glucose) may 
become limiting.
  Under  conditions   in  which  aerobic  metabolism   is 
inadequate for the demands of “high energy” phosphate 
production  an  alternate  mechanism  is  utilised  without 
the  immediate  use  of  O2,  but  which  results  in  lactate 
production;   this  is  termed   anaerobic   glycolysis.   The 
substrate  ‘cost’  for  the  production  of  energy  from  this 
reaction, however, is expensive compared to the complete 
oxidative breakdown of glycogen. The net gain in ATP is 
only 3 from each glycosyl unit anaerobically as opposed 
to 37 aerobically. For the same work rate, therefore, this 
pathway  causes  glycogen  (and  glucose)  to  be  used  at  a 
considerably faster rate than in the totally aerobic state. 
Moreover,  the  two  protons  formed  from  each  glucose 
molecule (or glucosyl unit) in association with these lactate 
molecules cause a disturbance of the acid-base balance in 
the cell and blood and accelerating the fatigue process.
Bio-energetic considerations for long-duration 
trireme rowing
The main issue in the consideration of very long duration 
exercise, such as concerns us here, is that energy provision 
that includes some energy derived from anaerobic glycolysis, 
is  not  sufficiently   sustainable.   The  increased   rate  of 
carbohydrate utilisation, that is a necessary consequence 
of anaerobic glycolysis, will cause the exercising athletes to 
become more rapidly glycogen depleted. The “standard” 
human stores about 400 g of glycogen in his/her muscles 
and a further 50 g in the liver (the liver can also produce 
glucose but at a slow rate compared to the rates of muscular 
consumption).  Even  with  access  to  modern-day  sports 
drinks and glucose-feeding régimes, it is difficult (if not 
impossible) for the athlete to ingest and utilise the amounts 
of  glycogen  during  exercise  that  are  required  to  sustain 
anaerobic  metabolism  for  very  long  durations.  Thus,  as 
muscle and liver glycogen stores are depleted, the athlete 
is  either  forced  to  lower  the  rate  of  power  production 
or he/she exhausts. The importance of muscle glycogen 
in work tolerance is well described and there is a strong 
positive correlation between the tolerable duration of high-
intensity exercise and muscle glycogen content prior to the 
exercise. Homeostasis of blood glucose is also necessary for 
the maintenance of normal cerebral function.
  The  description,   by  Casson  (1964,   121)  of  Louis 
XIV’s galleys being able to “sustain five knots per hour 
(sic) for the first hour, during the second hour only four 
and a half; after that ‘they dropped down to two knots or 
slower’” (as cited by Wallinga, above p. 153), is a likely 
reflection of an early metabolic acidosis and consequent 
effects on glycogen depletion and performance. Once the 
finite glycogen stores are near depletion, energy production 
must slow appreciably (e.g. Newsholme et al. 1992), as the 
combined rates of delivery of blood borne lipids, glucose, 
and intramuscular lipids are insufficient to meet the ATP 
demands of high-intensity excercise.
  It  is  reasonable  to  deduce,  therefore,  that  any  long 
duration exercise by the anicent oarsmen would need to 
be undertaken at a rate that did not deplete the muscle 
glycogen   store  prior  to  completion   of  the  task.  The 
physiological   parameter   demarking   the  threshold   for 
anaerobic  glycolysis  is  termed  the  anaerobic  (or  lactate) 
threshold.  In  “standard”  man  the  anaerobic  threshold 
occurs at an average of about 50% of the maximum aerobic 
capacity   (~50%  V ̇O2max),  at  which  point  obligatory 
anaerobiosis  occurs.  Thus,  élite  endurance  athletes  may 
have an anaerobic threshold at a much higher value (80% 
or more) of  V̇O2max. For a group of modern-day (junior 
international) sliding-seat oarsmen (Steinacker et al. 1993) 
the lactate threshold occurred between ~30 to 35 ml O2 per 
minute, per kg of body weight. This value may be applied 
in relation to the shorter, slighter statures that we would 
expect of the ancient Athenians (168 cm in height and 67 
kg in weight). This gives us an estimated lactate threshold of 
~2 to 2.3 l/min of V̇O2. Of this, ~300 ml/min is required 
for basal metabolism and ~400 ml/min for the ‘internal’ 
power required to move the oarsman’s body against gravity 
as  he  rows  (body-swing).  The  remainder  is  available  for 
external power production that can be distributed to the 
task in hand. Available estimates for modern-day sliding-
seat  rowing  (e.g.  Di  Prampero  et al.  1968;  Steinacker  et 
al. 1993) suggest that an oxygen cost of ~14 ml O2/min 
per watt power-output is a reasonable expectation. In this 
theoretical consideration, therefore (using modern values 
from sliding-seat rowing), the available power output for 
sustained exercise would be ~95–115W (i.e. from 1.3 to 
1.6 l/min at a cost of 14 ml O2.min-1.W-1). Interestingly, 
this value is close to the estimated power requirement to 
propel the Olympias at speeds appropriate for the ancient 
literature  (with  the  whole  crew  rowing  and  only  one 
rudder half-immersed in the water: 115W; cf. Shaw 1993, 
58–68).
  However, the total muscle mass utilised for the exercise 
has  a  significant  impact  on  the  total  V ̇O2  available  for 
the  task.  During  modern-day   sliding-seat   rowing  the 
predominant   power-generation   comes  from  the  large 
muscles  of  the  legs.  While  these  muscles  are  used  in 
fixed-seat rowing, their application is more of stabilisation 
than of oar-applied power-production, and there is little 
flexion and extension of the legs during the stroke. In our 
laboratories we have measured the maximum attainable   V ̇O2 during  fixed-seat  rowing  (with  an  effective  stroke 
length of 73 cm and rating of 36 spm, i.e. to mimic the 
conditions in Olympias) and found it to be only ~65% 
of that attained during sliding-seat rowing. However, to 
its advantage, fixed-seat rowing appears to have a lower 
O2-cost  than  sliding-seat,  at  about  10–12  ml  O2/min 
per  watt  power-output.  This  improvement  in  oxidative 
efficiency, however, does not make up for the considerable 
limitation of the reduced available exercising muscle mass. 
===== PAGE 180 =====
23. Paleo-bioenergetics 167
These vital considerations reduce the plausible sustainable 
limits  for  external  power  generation  to  only  ~80  W  at 
best. It is of interest, therefore, that of the estimated 115 
W per man required to sustain ~7.2 knots in Olympias, 
only  62  W  is  for  propulsive  movement;  the  remaining 
53 W was lost in oar slippage and in non-propulsive oar 
movement (cf. Shaw 1993, 58–68). This would suggest 
that mechanical improvements in the oar weight or oar 
system design in Olympias may provide a profitable avenue 
for  improving   the  sustainable   ship  speed.  These  two 
aspects  of  mechanical-efficiency  may  be  improved  with 
the canted-rig and longer stroke allowed by the proposals 
in  a  Mk  IIb  vessel  (see  above  pp.  76–91).  However,  in 
our  laboratory  experiments  using  a  stroke  length  of  99 
cm and ‘free rating’ (resulting in 28 spm) the O2-cost was 
essentially unaffected by the increased stroke length. This 
suggests that improvements in efficiency in a Mk II vessel 
may be more profitably explored through mechanical, not 
physiological, advances. 
Further physiological aspects for sustained 
exercise
For very long duration exercise, not only must the athletes 
maintain a power output below the threshold for anaerobic 
glycolysis, but also one that utilises carbohydrate at a rate 
that will not deplete the stores before the task is completed. 
In order that the glycogen not be depleted before the end 
of  a  continuous  row,  it  must  be  ‘eked-out’  for  the  ~18 
hour  duration  (assuming  continuous  exercise,  and  that 
no carbohydrate is ingested during this time). This would 
require  that  the  oarsmen  exercise  with  an  average  RER 
of ~0.74. Previous laboratory investigations of sustained 
exercise  have  demonstrated  that:  1)  RER  increases  with 
increasing work rate (e.g. Wasserman et al. 1999); and 2) 
work  rates  below  the  threshold  for  anaerobic  glycolysis 
manifest RER values close to the resting value of 0.8 (e.g. 
Wasserman et al. 1999; Watt et al. 2002).Thus, it may be that 
it is not enough for the trireme oarsmen simply to exercise 
below the lactate threshold; they may have to maintain a 
still lower value of V̇O2 in order to maintain blood and 
muscle glucose for the required duration. However, this 
aspect  is  hard  to  quantify,  even  in  theory,  as  it  will  be 
significantly affected by the oarsmen’s diet. The evidence 
that the ancient crews, on occasion, rested and rowed in 
turns, provides an interesting challenge for physiologists 
concerned with nutritional aspects of optimising prolonged 
activity strategies. However, it seems likely that the increased 
carbohydrate  utilisation  rate  during  the  exercise  period 
could  not  be  overcome  by  the  opportunity  for  partially 
replenishing these stores during the rest phase. These issues, 
however, remain to be addressed. Naturally, stresses to other 
physiological  control  systems  such  as  thermoregulatory 
(mid-day ambient temperature of ~35°C), and fluid and 
electrolyte balance (the rowers in the Olympias sweated 3–4 
litres/day) would also conspire to constrain the sustainable 
speed of the vessel.
Considerations and limitations
The  relevance   of  applying   aspects   of  efficiency   from 
modern-day sliding-seat rowing to trireme propulsion are, 
of course, open to criticism. Further measures of fixed-seat 
rowing using the body positioning based on the experience 
from Olympias would be of benefit. Also, comparisons with 
modern-day fixed-seat rowing, such as racing gigs, would 
provide an insight into the likely technological limitations 
of the ancient Athenians. Once the limits of wholly-aerobic 
power production are determined for fixed-seat rowing, the 
maximum  sustainable  power  output  can  be  determined 
with greater accuracy. This would provide us with a means 
of  assessing   the  plausibility   of  Xenophon’s  statement 
concerning  “a  long  day”.  If  we  find  that  even  a  Mk  II 
trireme would not be likely to produce the speeds expected 
by  the  designers,  due  to  the  limits  of  aerobic  human 
performance,   then  we  may  conclude  that  Xenophon’s 
statement that ‘the passage from Byzantium to Heraclea 
was a long day’s journey for a trieres with oars’ was fanciful 
or even propaganda – assuming, of course, that there was 
not some ‘hyper-efficient’ mechanical design of the original 
vessel-human interface of which we are unaware.
  The height and weight of the oarsmen is a significant 
concern   with   respect   to  establishing   the   relevant 
physiological  variables.  We  have  used  the  value  of  168 
cm for the height of the average Athenian in the current 
calculations,   but  further   investigation   as  to  whether 
the  trieres oarsmen were of average stature would prove 
profitable. It could be inferred from the Olympias experience 
or  plans  for  a  Mk  II  ship  that  there  may  have  been  a 
maximum height for the oarsmen, due to constraints of 
rowing in the available confined space. Similarly, there is 
evidence from the stadium at Corinth that some ancient 
Greek athletes may have been considerably taller than this 
168 cm estimate. A description of the starting blocks of 
the ancient runners provides us with indicators of their 
stature: “Each man has a pair of holes cut in the stone 
slab, left foot in front of right, twenty-five inches apart 
– uncomfortable for a runner less than six feet tall.” (183 
cm) (Harris 1974). Likewise the First Cohort of a Roman 
legion  had  a  minimum  recruitment  height  of  5  foot  9 
inches to 5 foot 11 inches (180 cm). Plausible metabolic 
estimates  have  recently  been  made  for  both  laden  and 
unladen  sustained  marching  speeds  of  ancient  Roman 
legionaries; speeds which were sustained for five summer 
hours (Whipp et al. 1998). The dramatic similarity between 
the  metabolic  costs  for  the  laden-speeds  compared  to 
speeds employed for unladen marching suggest that the 
ancient Roman ergonomic advisors to the military had a 
significant knowledge of the metabolic demands and costs 
of sustained activity. If the Athenians also understood the 
implications of very long duration exercise it could be that 
they were able to perform with this in mind and that the 
oarsmen recruited would be of larger-than-average stature. 
It may even be the case that the mixture of ‘bread and 
olive-oil’ that was ingested during these very long duration 
===== PAGE 181 =====
Harry Rossiter and Brian Whipp168
bouts of exercise would be particularly well suited to this 
type of exertion.
  It is interesting that the values estimated for the V ̇O2 
requirement (~1.5–2.1 l/min) discussed above are similar 
to those that have been judged as being “probably about 
the maximum sustained output of which the human frame 
is capable” (Lloyd 1966). This comment was made with 
respect to an élite performer in the six-day ‘go as you please’ 
contests during the latter half of the 19th century, in which 
the performers were required to cover as much distance as 
possible in six days under their own power (i.e. walk or 
run). The best of these men would cover more than 600 
miles at an estimated average V ̇O2 of ~2 l/min.
Conclusion
It  is  clear  from  the  sea  trials  that  crews  of  Olympias 
could  not  sustain  boat-speeds  required  by  Xenophon’s 
‘(very) long day.’ While it is also clear that great strides 
were  made  with  practice  and  improving  the  technique 
of  trieres rowing,  paleo-bioenergetic  considerations  can 
give  plausible  estimates  for  the  limitations  to  sustained 
exercise. The maximum plausible estimates consider that 
the ancient oarsmen would have to exercise below their 
lactate  threshold  and  at  rates  which  produced  average 
RER  values  no  greater  than  ~0.74.  We  conclude  that 
a  maximum  estimate  of  ~80 W  per  oarsmen  would  be 
available  for  external  power  production.  It  seems  likely 
that,  if  the  ancient  Athenians  had  knowledge  and/or 
technologies to improve the mechanical efficiency of the 
rowing  stroke  compared  to  that  measured  in  Olympias, 
then there would be metabolic scope for sustaining the 
required  speeds  for  a  ‘(very)  long  day.’  However,  the 
degree of mechanical advancement above those provided 
by Olympias would not be trivial and the rowers would 
have to have been highly fit athletes, even by modern-day 
standards. Further experiments are required to refine and 
extend  these  suggestions  and  provide  evidence  for  the 
plausible metabolic limits of the ‘human engine’ of the 
ancient trieres.
Acknowledgements
The  authors   would  like  to  thank  Timothy  Shaw  for 
introducing   us  to  this   issue.   His  considerable   and 
detailed   accounts   of  the  sea  trials   of  Olympias were 
invaluable  to  our  bio-energetic  consideration.  We  also 
thank Dr John Kowalchuk of the University of Western 
Ontario,  Canada  for  his  time  and  assistance  in  making 
the  metabolic  measurements  during  fixed-seat  rowing. 
HBR  is  an  International  Fellow  of  the Wellcome T rust 
(UK) (#064898).
Bibliography
Casson, L. (1964) Illustrated History of Ships and Boats. New 
York, Doubleday and Company Inc.
Harris, H. A. (1974) Greek Athletes and Athletics. London, 
Hutchinson.
Lloyd, B. B. (1966) The energetics of running: an analysis 
of world records The Advancement of Science (London) 22 
(103), 515–530.
Morrison, J. S. and Coates, J. F . (eds) (1989) An Athenian 
T rireme Reconstructed. The British sea trials of Olympias, 1987. 
BAR International Series, 486. Oxford, Archaeopress.
Morrison,  J.  S.,  Coates,  J.  F .  and  Rankov,  N.  B.  (2000) 
The Athenian Trireme: the history and reconstruction of 
an ancient warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,   Cambridge 
University Press.
Newsholme, E. A., Blomstrand, E. and Ekblom B. (1992) 
British Medical Bulletin 48 (3), 477–95.
Di Prampero, P . E., Cortili, G., Celentano, F . and Cerretelli, 
P . (1971) Physiological aspects of rowing. Journal of Applied 
Physiology 31 (6), 853–7.
Shaw,  T.  (ed.)  (1993a)   The Trireme Project. Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.  Oxbow Monograph 
31. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Shaw, T . (ed.) (1993b) Rowing Olympias: further lessons of 
the sea trials. In Shaw 1993, 58–68.
Steinacker,   J.  M.,  Both,   M.  and  Whipp,   B.  J.  (1993) 
Pulmonary mechanics and entrainment of respiration and 
stroke rate during rowing. International Journal of Sports 
Medicine 14 (Suppl. 1), S15–S19.
Wasserman, K., Hansen, J. E., Sue D. Y., Casaburi, R. and 
Whipp  B.  J.  (1999)  Principles of Exercise Testing and 
Interpretation. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, London, Lippincott 
Williams and Wilkins.
Watt, M. J., Heigenhauser, G. J. F ., Dyck, D. J. and Spriet, 
L. L. (2002) Intramuscular triacylglycerol, glycogen and 
acetyl group metabolism during 4 h of moderate exercise 
in man. Journal of Physiology 541, 969–78.
Whipp, B. J., Ward, S. A. and Hassall, M. W . C. (1998) Paleo-
bioenergetics:  the  metabolic  rate  of  marching  Roman 
legionaries. British Journal of Sports Medicine 32, 261–2.
===== PAGE 182 =====
Part 5
Aspects of T rireme Construction 
and Maintenance
===== PAGE 183 =====
24.  Uniformity or Multiplicity?  
On Vitruvius’ interscalmium
 
Ronald Bockius
This is an updated version of a paper previously published in 
German as Bockius 2000.
As  is  well  known,  reconstructions  of  ancient  warships 
are  characterized   by  a  lack  of  physical  evidence.  Our 
understanding  is  limited  by  the  fact  that  we  have  no 
significant remains of either Greek or Roman galleys, and 
essential data like dimensions, form, interior arrangements 
and technical equipment have to be deduced entirely from 
the interpretation of literary and iconographic evidence. 
Several surviving merchant wrecks, mostly Roman, have 
helped  us  to  understand  shipbuilding   techniques  and 
provided information on the materials and tools used in 
antiquity, but fully to understand something as complex 
as the oar mechanics of multiple‑banked galleys, propelled 
by the co‑ordinated efforts of massive crews squeezed into 
narrow wooden hulls would require access to actual warship 
wrecks.  Since  no  such  wrecks  have  yet  been  discovered 
– apart from a few light, single‑banked military vessels (see 
below), and the Punic Marsala ships (Frost 1981) whose 
propulsion  systems  have  attracted  very  little  attention 
– reconstructions have to rely on clues from illustrations 
of warships and incidental references in Greek and Roman 
writers or fragmentary inscriptions. The remains of ancient 
ship  sheds  are  important  for  estimating  the  maximum 
length and beam of certain warship types, but completely 
different  kinds  of  data  are  required  to  comprehend  the 
interiors of ships with oars operated by one or more men 
and arranged on two or three levels.
  These are the problems which have exercised generations 
of humanist scholars attempting to understand the trireme 
mystery.  The  latter  appeared  to  have  been  solved  when 
John  Morrison’s  and  John  Coates’  reconstruction  of  an 
Athenian trireme (Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000), 
the  Olympias,  was  launched  in  1987  and  subsequently 
trialled over several years to test her performance under 
oar and sail (Morrison and Coates 1989; Coates, Platis and 
Shaw 1990; Whitehead et al. 1990; Shaw 1993a; Morrison, 
Coates and Rankov 2000). It was confidently expected that 
these trials would not only illuminate the ship’s capabilities 
and operation, but also produce performance figures in 
line with the historical data.
  Neither   the  creators   of  Olympias   nor  those   who 
conducted the trials have been entirely satisfied with the 
results. In particular, it has been felt that her speed under 
oar did not match what she was thought to be capable of 
hydrodynamically (Whitehead et al. 1989; 1990, 292–4; 
Coates et al. 1990; Coates 1993a). In the course of the 
trials, it soon became evident that some of the details of 
the reconstruction had to be modified (e.g. the shape and 
size of the oar blades), and performance was certainly not 
enhanced by the inexperience of her oar crews in fixed‑
seat rowing, nor by their being, on average, physically too 
large for the ship (e.g. Whitehead et al. 1989, 28, 32–45, 
fig.  27;  Weiskittel  1989;  Coates  et al.   1990,  68;  Shaw 
1993b). In particular, one of the most fundamental aspects 
of Olympias’ design, the distance between her thole‑pins, 
has been called into question. Thus, the current proposal 
for a Mark II reconstruction is driven by a perception that 
the room provided for each of Olympias’ oarsmen was too 
short  (Coates  1993b;  Coates  and  Morrison  1993,  108; 
Morrison 1993; Coates, above pp. 82–3, 138).
  Olympias was designed on the basis of several disparate 
pieces of historical and archaeological evidence interpreted 
in  the  light  of  the  experience  and  practical  knowledge 
of  a  distinguished   naval  architect,   John  Coates.   The 
ship’s overall dimensions and the spacing of the interior 
structures  were  derived  from  two  items  of  evidence  in 
particular: the remains of the ship sheds of the Athenian 
naval  base  at  Zea,  and  the  implication  in  a  passage  of 
the Roman architect Vitruvius that the distance between 
the  thole‑pins of  ancient  war  ships  was  two  cubits  (De 
architectura   1.2.4:  navibus interscalmio quae διπηχυa‹α 
dicitur). Vitruvius’ interscalmium was originally interpreted 
by John Morrison as a distance of two Attic cubits, i.e. 
approx. 89 cms (the same distance, incidentally, as two 
Roman  cubits,  the  equivalent  of  three  pedes monetales ). 
This figure not only determines the distribution of fittings, 
===== PAGE 184 =====
24. Uniformity or Multiplicity? On Vitruvius’ interscalmium 171
oarsmen,  etc.,  but  also  influences  the  proportions  and 
overall  length  of  the  ship  (Morrison  and  Coates  1989; 
Morrison, Coates and Rankov, 2000). 
  Although each oarsman in Olympias has 89 cms room 
fore‑and‑aft  (Fig.  24.1),  one  component  of  her  inner 
structure limits considerably the use which can be made 
of that room. The cross‑beams (zyga) of the ship, on which 
the middle level of rowers (zygitai) sit, reduce the freedom 
of movement of the thalamians seated in the lowest level 
below the zygians (Fig. 24.2). The limitation of the reach 
of  the  thalamians,  and  therefore  of  their  stroke‑length 
and so that of the crew as a whole, undoubtedly affected 
Olympias’ performance. So, too, did the use of individual 
rowers whose size made it impossible for them to obtain full 
reach without hitting the back of the rower immediately 
astern.  Because  of  these  limitations,  the  interpretation 
of  Vitruvius’  reference  has  now  been  revised.  On  the 
new hypothesis, based on a metrological relief found on 
Salamis in 1985 but not published until 1990, the two‑
cubit  interscalmium of an Athenian trireme would have 
been approx. 98 cm long (Morrison 1991; 1993, 11–13, 
18–19 n. 3; Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 245–6, 
268–9; Coates, above, pp. 83, 138).
  A room of about 98 cm would certainly alleviate the 
rowing problems mentioned, but would also have other 
implications. It will be obvious that a reconstruction based 
on an increased room of just under 1 m will produce a 
hull which is almost 10% longer than the Olympias design 
(Coates 1996, 288–9, figs 55–56, 345 app. D; Morrison, 
Coates and Rankov 2000, 269; Coates, above pp. 83, 88, 
138). A ship of approximately 40 m would still fit within 
the Zea ship sheds, and in fact, we do not know whether 
triremes  were  the  same  length  as  the  buildings  which 
housed them. The ships themselves may well have been 
significantly shorter than the sheds.
  T wo further questions must be raised concerning the 
interpretation of Vitruvius’ term. Firstly, should we take 
his two‑cubit interscalmium to be a fixed standard or norm 
without any deviation, or as an average to be taken only 
as  a  guideline?  Secondly,  can  we  definitely  exclude  the 
possibility that a room of about 89 cm is too short to be 
viable for the oarsmen of three‑banked warships?
   The linguistic and metrological data are too vague to 
answer these complex questions definitively. It may help, 
therefore, to bring some comparative archaeological data 
to bear. A number of Roman wrecks excavated at Mainz 
(Rhineland‑Palatinate) and at Oberstimm near Ingolstadt 
(Bavaria) provide such data and are considered here. At 
these  sites,  situated  on  the  Rhine  and  Danube  rivers 
respectively, the remains of several large vessels have come 
to light which reveal how oarsmen were arranged in ships 
of the Roman period. Although the vessels are characterized 
by  a  single‑banked  oarsystem,  they  represent  the  only 
opportunity offered to date to study ancient oar propulsion 
in any detail, since they preserve evidence of their internal 
furniture and mechanical fittings. In these ships at least, 
rooms of both 89 and 98 cm were employed, and there was 
no strict standardization of the oarsmen’s room. Moreover, 
investigation of other ancient and medieval wrecks suggests 
that oarsmen frequently had less than 98 cm room at their 
disposal, and sometimes even less than 89 cm.
Figure 24.1. Reconstruction of an Athenian trireme. Perspective view of the middle (zygians) and upper level (thranites) of the 
oarcrew (after Morrison and Coates 1990, 235, fig. 66).
===== PAGE 185 =====
Ronald Bockius172
The late Roman shipwrecks of the 4th century 
AD found in Mainz
In the winter of 1981/82, the remains of five ships were 
discovered near the ancient waterfront outside the Roman 
city walls of Mogontiacum (Mainz). The vessels were built 
in the Romano‑Celtic tradition of planks nailed to frames 
and  nearly  all  the  constructional  elements  were  of  oak. 
Other features, like massive frames with mast steps and 
caulking, were also typical of this tradition. T wo different 
ship types were identified (Höckmann 1988; 1991; 1993), 
but  only  the  four  wrecks  (nos  1,  2,  4  and  5)  of  type 
Mainz I are relevant to our present discussion. According 
to  Olaf  Höckmann’s  most  recent  reconstruction  of  the 
principal dimensions, the type I ships were extraordinarily 
narrow, with a beam of c. 2.7 m, length of c. 21 m, and 
depth of 0.9 m (Pferdehirt 1995, 7–24; figs 17 and 22; 
pl. 1). However, further investigations have shown that 
only the length of wreck 5 (formerly no. 9) can be safely 
reconstructed. As revised analyses of both the ship’s timbers 
and  the  photogrammetric  documentation  have  proved, 
ship  no.  5  was  originally  some  17.5  m  long  (Bockius 
2006,  177–187  App.  8).  The  hull  measurements  and 
several structural elements of wrecks 1 and 5 indicate a 
crew of 24 or 26 oarsmen. The volumetric coefficients of 
the hulls and the number of oarsmen they accommodated 
suggest that the main design requirement of these craft 
was speed under oars. 
   Mainz wreck 4 is a fragment of a long but slender vessel 
with  parts  of  the  ship’s  port  side  preserved.  Internally, 
between the chine and the topwale, the side frames and the 
upper surfaces of the floor timbers are enclosed by three 
wide boards nailed to the ribs (Fig. 24.3). The thole‑pins 
are missing, but an opening in the preserved ship’s side 
suggests that a horizontal timber protruded on both sides 
of  the  hull,  presumably  as  an  attachment  for  two  side‑
rudders.  A  curved,  wooden,  fore‑and‑aft  reinforcement 
for such a cross‑beam was also recorded. It follows that 
wreck 4 represents the after part of a ship.
  The upper edge of the first (i.e. the uppermost) board 
nailed inside the hull lies 12 to 15 cm below the topwale. 
Eight deep slots, 20–24 cm long and 3 cm deep, were cut 
into  this  edge  for  the  insertion  of  board‑like  transoms, 
which  without  doubt  acted  as  thwarts.  The  distances 
between the slots, each measured from central point to 
central point, are 84, 86, 87, 89 and 92 cm respectively. 
Since the removable tholes have been lost, we do not know 
whether these distances correspond to the original distances 
between  the  thole‑pins.  Nevertheless,  it  is  obvious  that 
the  distribution  of  thwarts  would  have  determined  the 
fore‑and‑aft room available for each rower. Consequently, 
we can assume that the values of 84 to 92 cm represent the 
Figure 24.2. Reconstruction of an Athenian trireme. Longitudinal section on the port side showing the room of the oarsmen 
and the sweep of the upper parts of their bodies at the beginning and end of a long oarstroke. The hatched beams at the level 
of the thalamians’ heads are 10% closer together than the interscalmium of 88.8 cms (drawing modified after J. F . Coates in 
Morrison and Coates 1989, 23, fig. 10).
===== PAGE 186 =====
24. Uniformity or Multiplicity? On Vitruvius’ interscalmium 173
metrical range of the ship’s interscalmia. Her rooms were 
obviously shorter than 98 cm, and most seem to have been 
even shorter than the equivalent of 2 Roman cubits, i.e. 
89 cm. All the measurements of the Mainz wrecks were 
taken either from photogrammetrical plans or full‑scale 
drawings of the wet wood, and the assumed error is less 
than ±1 cm.
  The  arrangement  of  oblong  recesses  for  thwarts  in 
the  uppermost  board  corresponds  to  the  distribution  of 
squarer slots cut into the upper edge of the second board, 
situated  about  30  cm  below  the  first  (Fig.  24.3).  Each 
of  the  square  slots  is  positioned  70  to  80  cm  aft  of  its 
corresponding thwart recess. Their height and longitudinal 
positioning within the hull indicates that the slots in the 
second board served as fastenings for some kind of foot 
stretchers, presumably simple joists with one side chamfered 
bow‑wards towards its corresponding thwart. Further slots 
in the third board situated low in the hull are irregularly 
distributed.  In  view  of  their  position,  it  is  most  likely 
that they carried cross‑beams for the lower gangboards, as 
indicated by fragments found in wrecks 1 and 5. 
  Mainz  wreck  1  (Figs  24.4,  24.5  and  24.6)  had  the 
same type of steering installation as wreck 4. This wreck 
too must represent the after part of a ship. The topwale 
is well preserved as a single piece of wood over a distance 
of 2.5 m. It was made of oak and its upper surface was 
chiselled   into  segments   with  alternately   square   and 
rounded sections. This timber enclosed the upper edge of 
the ship’s side, which is made up of the sheer strake (with 
a separate rubbing strake on its outer surface), the heads 
of the side frames, and a wale nailed to the latter from 
the inside. The whole construction is about 16 cm across. 
The rounded D‑shaped blocks in the topwale are each 35 
to 40 cm long with a single hole drilled into it (one hole 
still contains the lower plug‑end of a wooden thole‑pin). 
All the existing holes are asymmetrically positioned in the 
blocks, so that the mid‑axis of an oarshaft 6 cms in diameter 
resting directly forward of the thole‑pin would mark the 
exact centre of the block. The three holes preserved allow 
calculation of two of the  interscalmia at the stern of the 
boat. Here, the distance between thole‑pins was 95 and 
96 cm, i.e. closer to the value of 98 cm suggested by John 
Morrison for the trireme than to the 89 cm which is the 
equivalent of 2 Roman cubits.
  In wreck 1, a board is located 20 cm below the tholes. 
Its upper edge shows several recesses of the kind already 
described for wreck 4. The slots, which originally carried 
thwarts, are 12 to 20 cm long and 3 to 4 cm deep. Their 
regular distribution corresponds to the 95/96 cm distance 
between the tholes. There is, however, one unusual feature: 
the distance measured from the centre of each slot to the 
bow‑ward edge of the corresponding thole‑pin is at least 
60 cm in each case. If one considers that each recess is 
a maximum of 20 cm long, then the after edge of each 
thwart must have been not less than 50 cm away from the 
nearest oar pivot. This is significantly more than is normal 
in traditional working boats of the modern era (see McKee 
1983, p. 136). The extraordinarily long distance between 
the tholes and the thwarts must have considerably reduced 
the efficiency of oar propulsion in this vessel, by moving 
Figure 24.3. Photogrammetrical plan of late Roman wreck no. 4 from Mainz, Löhrstraße (after Böhler, Fachhochschule Mainz, 
Vermessungswesen). Hull interior of the wreck in an approximately upright position, elevation (above) and plan (below).
===== PAGE 187 =====
Ronald Bockius174
Figure 24.4. Mainz, Löhrstraße. Site of late Roman wreck no. 1 (photograph by Landesamt für Denkmalpflege, Abteilung 
Archäologische Denkmalpflege, Mainz).
Figure 24.5. Photogrammetrical plan of late Roman wreck no. 1 from Mainz, Löhrstraße (after Böhler, Fachhochschule Mainz, 
Vermessungswesen). Hull interior of the wreck in an approximately upright position, plan (above) and elevation (below).

===== PAGE 188 =====
24. Uniformity or Multiplicity? On Vitruvius’ interscalmium 175
much of the arc of the oar‑stroke aft of vertical to the side 
of  the  ship.  Since  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  the  thwarts 
could have been wider than 20 cm, or that the ancient 
shipwrights  deliberately  designed  an  inferior  oarsystem, 
one must assume that ship 1 was intended to be rowed 
with short, powerful strokes, such as are normally used in 
rough water.
The Roman ships ( c. AD 106) found at 
Oberstimm, near Ingolstadt (Bavaria)
In 1986, two wrecks were found close to the Roman fort 
at Oberstimm near the Danube (Höckmann 1987; 1989; 
1995,  84–7;  Bockius  2002).  The  complete  excavation 
and salvage of these unusually well‑preserved boats was 
carried out in 1994 by the Museum für Antike Schiffahrt, 
Mainz in co‑operation with other German archaeological 
units (Hüssen et al. 1994; 1995; Kremer 1997). Both the 
wrecks were raised from the mud and have been treated 
in the laboratories of the Mainz museum. They are now 
exhibited in a museum near the site.
  The Oberstimm boats have carvel‑built hulls, constructed 
shell‑first with mortise and tenon joints. The presence of 
keelsons and the use of pine for the strakes and oak for 
keels and frames (as well as the thwarts) are all typical of 
ancient  Mediterranean  construction  (e.g.  Casson  1994, 
26–35; Marsden 1996). In contrast to the Mainz ships, 
which to date remain unique, those found at Oberstimm 
can be compared to a boat discovered in Vechten in the 
Netherlands (see below). The military purpose of both the 
Mainz ships and the Oberstimm boats is deduced from the 
fact that they were found in the vicinity of Roman military 
installations, but a clearer indication of their function is 
given by their proportions and oarsystems. The Oberstimm 
boats are single‑banked craft, 15 to 16 m long and 2.6 
m broad, and were evidently rowed by crews of 18 or 20 
men (Bockius 2002a).
  As with the Mainz ships, the oarsystems of the Oberstimm 
wrecks have been preserved in sufficient detail to provide 
measurements  for  analysis.  The  keelsons  found  in  both 
Oberstimm wrecks each show not only a mast step but also 
a series of holes distributed over their whole length. These 
holes originally held vertical stanchions to carry thwarts 
above the keel. Of the thwarts themselves, two are partially 
preserved  in  wreck  1,  and  others  are  indicated  in  both 
boats by elongated slots found in the upper edges of the 
wales below the sheer‑strakes (though the latter are missing 
in wreck 2). The stanchions and slots for the thwarts lie 
on the same transverse axes of the ships. A sheer‑strake is 
preserved in wreck 1 over a distance of 9.5 m, and acted 
both as a topwale and rubbing strip. Slit‑like openings were 
discovered in its upper edge, some containing the remains 
of thole‑pins with a circular section 3 cm in diameter in 
their upper portions, and with broadened bases.
  The  thwart  slots  found  in  the  wale  of  wreck  1  (Fig. 
24.8)  are  separated  by  distances  of  between  84  and  99 
cms. The shortest room, of 84 cm, is located in the stern 
of the boat. The aftermost slot, however, differs in shape 
from the others, so that it is not certain whether it can 
be identified as having supported a thwart. If the room 
of 84 cms is included, the mathematical average of the 
rooms is c. 95 cm; without the short room, the average is 
c. 97 cms. The interscalmia of boat 1 measured between 
the thole‑pins varies between 95 or 96 cm and, in a single 
Figure 24.6. Mainz, type I. Hull interior reconstructed from wrecks nos. 1 and 5 (formerly no. 9). 1 scarboard with slots for 
thwarts (6); 2–3 stringers with slots for foot-stretcher (8) crosspieces; 4–5 longitudinal stringers stiffening the thwart stanchions 
(7), with slots for foot-stretcher crosspieces corresponding to those in the side-stringers.
===== PAGE 189 =====
Ronald Bockius176
Figure 24.7. Oberstimm near Ingolstadt (Bavaria), wrecks no. 1 (partly covered) and no. 2 (photograph by Mittermüller, 
Bayerisches Landesamt für Denkmalpflege, Ingolstadt).
Figure 24.8. Oberstimm near Ingolstadt (Bavaria), wreck 1. Plan and cross-sections made during excavation (after H. Schaaff, 
Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum Mainz).
===== PAGE 190 =====
24. Uniformity or Multiplicity? On Vitruvius’ interscalmium 177
instance, 99 cm. The average is 96.5 cm which corresponds 
closely to the average distance between the thwarts. Thus, 
Oberstimm wreck 1 and Mainz wreck 1 have more or less 
identical interscalmia. Furthermore, the vertical distance 
between the tholes and the level of the thwarts is c. 22 
cm in both wrecks.
  In Oberstimm wreck 2, the distribution of slots for the 
thwarts indicates only a slightly shorter interscalmium than 
in wreck 1. The slots are set at distances of between 94 
and 96 (average 95) cm apart. A similar spread is shown 
in the distances between three holes for thwart‑stanchions 
which were cut into in the keelson 93.5 cm apart.
Other oared vessels of the Roman period
Five other Roman wrecks provide evidence for interscalmia. 
As  with  the  German  wrecks,  a  military  character  can 
be  assumed   for  the  Vechten  boat,  discovered   in  the 
Netherlands   in  1893  (Ellmers  1972,  293;  De  Weerd 
1988, 184–94, figs 109–12; Höckmann 1994). Excavation 
records give a distance of c. 92 cm between the thwarts. 
This corresponds to the rooms in Mainz wreck 4. 
  A personal communication by the late Professor J.R. 
Steffy of the Institute for Nautical Archaeology at Texas A 
and M University indicates that the interscalmia measured 
at two places on the Herculaneum wreck which was buried 
by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79 (Steffy 1994, 
67–71) are 92 and 112.5 cms respectively. The small size 
of  the  vessel,  however,  thought  to  have  been  only  9  m 
long, makes a military function unlikely. 
  The  same  is  true  of  wreck  2  found  at  Yverdon  near 
the lake of Neuchatel in Switzerland. Slots found in the 
inner surfaces of the ship’s sides indicate the existence of 
thwarts which were between 104 to 110 cm apart (Arnold 
1992,  21–45,  esp.  39  with  table).  The  relatively  heavy 
construction   of  the  Yverdon  boat  excludes  a  military 
purpose  because  the  narrow  beam  of  1.2  m  would  not 
have allowed two men to row abreast.
  A non‑military function is also assumed for an early 
2nd‑century wreck, nave F , found in Pisa, Italy. This boat 
has a unique oar system, with four oarsmen arranged in 
single file and tholes separated by two rooms of 112 cm 
each (Bockius 2002b; 2007, 73 fig. 82). By contrast, Pisa 
nave C bears the features of a small naval vessel. Dated 
to  the  beginning  of  the  1st  century  AD,  the  wreck  is 
notable for its completely preserved oar system. The oars 
were  worked  through  six  oblong  oar  ports,  which  were 
originally enclosed by leather sleeves (askomata). The ship’s 
bow resembles depictions of Hellenistic and early Roman 
war galleys, and includes a cutwater sheathed with iron 
plates.  According  to  a  preliminary  publication  (Bonino 
2006), the thwarts and oar ports of Pisa C were positioned 
somewhat more than 1 m apart. 
The implications of the Roman evidence
The data cited suggest that the interscalmia of the ships of 
the Roman fleets on the Rhine and Danube were normally 
between  94  and  96  cm,  although  occasionally  shorter 
examples are found. In craft which are believed to have 
been working boats or cargo vessels much longer rooms 
are attested, although the ‘military’  interscalmium of 92 
cm recorded for the Herculaneum wreck shows that it was 
also used by civilian oarsmen. It does not appear from this 
evidence at least that Roman military vessels were ever built 
to a standard interscalmium of as little two Roman cubits 
(i.e. 89 cm). Vitruvius, of course, chose to use a Greek 
word to describe the two‑cubit interscalmium, so that it 
may in any case be wrong to interpret it in terms of Roman 
cubits. Furthermore, it is unclear whether the rooms of 
single‑ and multiple‑banked units were comparable.
  In fact, some of the Roman evidence fits very well with 
the longer Greek cubit suggested by John Morrison. An 
investigation of the metrological relief from Salamis which 
Morrison  used  to  postulate  a  98  cm  interscalmium  has 
indicated that it actually records a cubit of 48.38 cm ±0.2% 
rather  than  the  49  cm  originally  reported  (Rottländer 
1992). This gives a two‑cubit interscalmium of 96.76 cm, 
which is close to those measured in Oberstimm wreck 2 
(94 to 96 cm) and Mainz wreck 1 (95 and 96 cm). This 
may of course be coincidental.
   The  only  clear  deduction  which  can  be  made  from 
Vitruvius’  text  seems  to  be  that  there  was  some  sort  of 
standard employed in the arrangement of oars in warships. 
This  is  implied  in  his  use  of  the  interscalmium, quae 
διπηχυa‹α dicitur in the context of a discussion of symmetria 
(De  architectura  1.2.4).  But  the  archaeological  evidence 
raises  doubts  as  to  whether  the  standard  was  closely 
adhered to in practice. It is even possible that irregularities 
within the same ship, whether intentional or accidental, 
were used to accommodate oarsmen of differing statures, 
though such irregularities appear to have been greater in 
boats intended for civilian use than in warships.
  On the other hand, the rooms of Mainz wreck 4 (84 
to  92  cm)  and Vechten  (c.  92  cm),  and,  probably,  one 
of the interscalmia of Oberstimm wreck 1 (84 cm) come 
close  to  the  equivalent  of  2  Roman  cubits  (c.  89  cm). 
Since  variations  are  recorded  in  all  the  better‑preserved 
wrecks,  whether  of  military  or  of  civilian  vessels,  any 
single measurement cannot tell us anything about a ship’s 
average  room.  And  since  complete  precision  was  not 
demanded in ancient shipbuilding and ancient measuring 
instruments were evidently not calibrated with absolute 
exactitude (Bockius 1996, 524–7, tab. 4), the interscalmium 
question cannot be answered by ship archaeology alone. 
Nevertheless, a survey of surviving wrecks can throw light 
on shipbuilding practice and reveal how much room was 
needed by ancient oarsmen.
Oared boats and ships from the Migration 
Period to the Middle Ages
A fairly large number of Germanic and Slav oared boats and 
ships have survived, mostly from the post‑Roman period. 
Surveys of the distances between features such as oarports 
and rowlocks give us some idea about the room available 
===== PAGE 191 =====
Ronald Bockius178
to Dark‑age and Medieval oarsmen. In some wrecks, the 
complete oarsystem has survived. In these cases, the entire 
arrangement of tholes and thwarts and their relationship 
to each other can be studied. Even where the upper parts 
of a hull have been destroyed, the distances between the 
floor  timbers  of  the  midship  section  can  still  indicate 
fore‑and‑aft  room,  because  the  position  of  the  thwarts 
usually corresponded to that of the ribs. Although not all 
records of Baltic and Scandinavian clinker vessels allow 
exact measurement, the present writer has attempted to 
compile a general synopsis. The number of measurements 
available  allows  us  to  even  out  errors  caused  by  scaling 
of plans, by inaccurate reconstruction, or by generalising 
statements published in papers or books. 
  As shown in Fig. 24.8, the range of rooms recorded in 
post‑Roman boats and ships is distinctly greater than that 
of the interscalmia of Roman wrecks. At the lower end of 
the range, one or more rooms were shorter than 89 cm 
in half the vessels surveyed. Astonishingly, a few Slav and 
Viking ships were provided with rooms of 80 cms or less. In 
Figure 24.9. T able showing distances between installations (tholes, thwarts, floor timbers) found on wrecks dated to the Roman 
period (vessels built in the Mediterranean or Romano-Celtic tradition: upper group), and to the Migration Period and Middle 
Ages (vessels built in the Nordic tradition: lower group). Measurements are taken from centre to centre of the elements indicated: 
O = oarports; R = rowlocks or thole-pins; T = thwarts; F = frames. The Baltic and Scandinavian wrecks are those on the list 
published by Crumlin-Pedersen 1997, 110–111, T ab. 5.1 with additions.
===== PAGE 192 =====
24. Uniformity or Multiplicity? On Vitruvius’ interscalmium 179
Skuldelev 5 as originally fitted out (though the arrangement 
was later modified), the oarcrew had an average room of 
only 78 cm fore‑and‑aft, and some individuals apparently 
had  only  70  cms  in  which  to  take  a  stroke  (Olsen  and 
Crumlin‑Pedersen 1968, 140–2). Skuldelev 5 thus provides 
evidence  of  just  how  small  a  room  could  be  considered 
viable. Seen in this light, an interscalmium of 89 cm would 
seem to be more than adequate for normal purposes, and 
a room of 98 cm almost luxurious.
Conclusions: the absence of uniformity and the 
importance of weight:power ratio
The  two‑dimensional   arrangement   of  oarsmen  in  the 
single‑banked   vessels  considered   in  this  paper  would 
have  differed  considerably  from  the  relatively  complex 
arrangement  in  multiple‑banked  ships  with  their  three‑
dimensional distribution of men and fittings. Nevertheless, 
our observations of single‑banked ships suggest that the 
provision of generous rooms was seen as of relatively minor 
importance  for  generating  speed  under  oar,  compared 
to packing in the largest possible number of rowers and 
keeping overall displacement to a minimum. This should 
be equally true for multiple‑banked units like the Athenian 
trireme. If so, the designers of ancient warships will have 
been keen to keep a good ratio between the mass to be 
accelerated and the number of oars generating the power. 
A further comparison may help to elucidate this.
  Fully  equipped  and  manned,  a  late  Roman  ship  of 
Mainz I type displaces some 6.8 tonnes (Marsden 1993 
makes it more). Thus the 24 or 26 oarsmen each moves 
260 kg or 280 kg respectively. The 18 or 20 crew of the 
Oberstimm boats displacing 4.8 and 5 tonnes each moves 
a similar weight of vessel – 250/275 kg. In Olympias, each 
oarsman moves 235 to 265 kg of the ship’s weight (based 
on the data in Coates 1989, 20 and 67; Whitehead et al. 
1989, 26–27). In a Mark II reconstruction, with overall 
length increased by 10%, each rower would still be moving 
less than 300 kg (Coates 1996, 345 App D). According 
to  these  figures,  a  man‑to‑weight  ratio  of  at  most  300 
kg  appears  to  have  been  normal  for  fast  oared  ships  in 
antiquity. Speed, of course, does not depend only on this 
ratio, but other aspects (lines, coefficients etc.) being equal, 
and  given  the  limited  efficiency  of  oar  power,  ancient 
warship designers are likely to have sought to save weight 
wherever possible.
  The  significance   of  a  good  weight:power   ratio  can 
be  demonstrated   by  two  contrasting   examples.   The 
displacements   of  the  Nydam  I  and  Oseberg  ships  as 
calculated   by  Timmermann   (1956,   403–7,   607–10) 
and  the  distribution  of  rowlocks  in  Nydam  ship  B  as 
reconstructed   by  Johannessen   (Shetelig   1930,  Plates 
I–II) suggest the following ratios: 295 kg per oarsman in 
Nydam I and 335 kg in the Oseberg ship. The first was a 
narrow ship rowed by a large number of oarsmen, while 
the second could be propelled either by oar or by sail. The 
performance of the Oseberg ship will have been similar 
to that of Oberstimm 2, since they have nearly identical 
proportions (Oseberg/Oberstimm 2: CWP 0.548/0.576; 
CM  0.559/0.576;  CB  0.295/0.297;  CV  0.528/0.516; 
LWL:D1/3 9.175/9.163). Clearly, the designs of all three 
of these vessels was geared towards saving weight, and we 
can  guess  that  this  was  determined  by  the  need  to  rely 
largely on oars. An opposite tendency is reflected in the 
Gokstad ship (Timmermann 1956, 602–7). Once her sail 
was shortened, each oarsman had to accelerate a mass of 
at least 900 kg.
  For these reasons, the present writer is sceptical as to 
whether one should seek to optimise the speed of the Mark II 
trireme by giving her a longer interscalmium than Olympias. 
Our  archaeological   evidence   indicates   a  considerable 
range  for  distances  between  tholes.  Archaeologically,  it 
would  be  acceptable  to  choose  any  of  the  interscalmia 
attested in the surviving wrecks of ancient military vessels. 
The interpretation of Vitruvius’ reference allows of wide 
variation. Neither an 89 cm nor a 98 cm interscalmium 
can be regarded as a norm.
Bibliography
Arnold,   B.  (1992)   Batellerie gallo -romaine sur le lac de 
Neuchâtel 2. Archéologie Neuchateloise 13. Saint‑Blaise, 
Neuchâtel, Editions du Ruau.
Bockius,   R.  (1996)  Zur  Rekonstruktion   des  römischen 
Plattbodenschiffes   aus   Woerden.   Jahrbuch des 
Römisch-Germanischen Zentralmuseums Mainz   43,  511–
530.
Bockius,   R.  (2000)   Gleichmaß   oder   Vielfalt?   Zum 
interscalmium bei  Vitruv  (De architectura I  2,21  f.).  In 
Studia Antiquaria. Festschrift für Niels Bantelmann zum 60. 
Geburtstag.  Universitätsforschungen  zur  prähistorischen 
Archäologie.  Institut  für  Vor‑  und  Frühgeschichte  der 
Universität Mainz 63. Bonn, R. Habelt, 111–125.
Bockius,   R.  (2002a)  Die römerzeitliche Schiffsfunde 
von Oberstimm in Bayern. Römisch ‑Germanisches 
Zentralmuseum,   Forschungsinstitut   für   Vor‑  und 
Frühgeschichte.  Monographien  50.  Mainz,  Verlag  des 
Römisch‑Germanischen Zentralmuseums.
Bockius,  R.  (2002b)  On  the  reconstruction  of  Pisa,  nave 
F , by the Museum für Antike Schiffahrt, Mainz. In The 
Ancient Ships of Pisa. A European laboratory for research 
and preservation .  “Culture  2000”  programme.  Brussels, 
23–29, 101–104.
Bockius, R. (2006) Die spätrömischen Schiffswracks aus Mainz. 
Schiffsarchäologisch-technikgeschichtliche Untersuchung 
spätantiker Schiffsfunde vom nördlichen Oberrhein. Römisch‑
Germanisches   Zentralmuseum,   Forschungsinstitut   für 
Vor‑  und  Frühgeschichte.   Monographien   67.  Mainz, 
Verlag des Römisch‑Germanischen Zentralmuseums.
Bockius, R. (2007) Schifffahrt und Schiffbau in der Antike . 
Stuttgart, Konrad Theiss Verlag.
Bonino,  M.  (2006)  Il  Gabbiano.  Una barca  a  remi  di  età 
Augustea. In A. Camilli, A. De Laurenzi and E. Setari (eds), 
Alkedo. Navi e commerci della Pisa romana. Cantiere delle 
Navi Antiche di Pisa dal 18 luglio 2006. Pisa, 21–24.
Casson, L. (1994) Ships and Seafaring in Ancient Times. Austin 
TX, University of T exas Press.
===== PAGE 193 =====
Ronald Bockius180
Coates,  J.  F . (1989)  The  reconstruction.  In  Morrison  and 
Coates 1989, 16–25, 67.
Coates,  J.  F .  (1993a)  The  sea  trials,  the  validity   of  the 
reconstruction in retrospect, and aims for the future. In 
Shaw 1993a, 110–111.
Coates, J. F . (1993b) Development of the design. In Shaw 
1993a, 71–74.
Coates, J. F . (1996) Reconstructing the ships. In Morrison 
1996, 279–348.
Coates, J. F . and Morrison, J. S. (1993) Summary of lessons 
learned. In Shaw 1993a, 108–109.
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (eds) (1990) The 
Trireme Trials 1988. Report on the Anglo-Hellenic Sea Trials 
of Olympias. Oxford, Oxbow Books. 
Crumlin‑Pedersen,   O.  (1997)   Viking -Age Ships and 
Shipbuilding in Hedeby/Haithabu and Schleswig. Ships and 
Boats of the North 2. Roskilde, Viking Ship Museum.
De  Weerd,   M.D.   (1988)   Schepen voor Zwammerdam . 
Amsterdam,   Academisch   Proefschrift   Universiteit 
Amsterdam.
Ellmers, D.  (1972)  Frühmittelalterliche Handelsschiffahrt in 
Mittel- und Nordeuropa.   Offa‑Bücher  28.  Neumünster, 
K. Wachholz.
Frost, H. et al. (1981) Lilybaeum (Marsala). The Punic ship: 
final  excavation  report.  Notizie degli Scavi di Antichità , 
Serie 8, Supplement 30.
Höckmann,   O.  (1987)   Roman   Danube   vessels   from 
Oberstimm, Germany. In H. Tzalas (ed.) Tropis II. 2nd 
International Symposium on Ship Construction in Antiquity, 
Delphi, 1987. Proceedings. Delphi, Hellenic Institute for 
the Preservation of Nautical T radition, 215–224.
Höckmann, O. (1988) Late Roman river craft from Mainz, 
Germany. In O. Lixa Filgueiras (ed.), Local Boats. Fourth 
International Symposium on Boat and Ship Archaeology, 
Porto, 1985, British Archaeological Reports, International 
Series, 438/1. Oxford, Archaeopress, 23–34.
Höckmann, O. (1989) Römische Schiffsfunde westlich des 
Kastells  Oberstimm.  Berichte der Römisch-Germanischen 
Kommission 70, 321–350.
Höckmann, O. (1991) Römische Schiffsfunde in Mainz. In (U. 
Löber (ed.), 2000 Jahre Rheinschiffahrt. Veröffentlichung 
des   Landesmuseums   Koblenz,   Band   40.   Koblenz, 
Landesmuseum Koblenz, 49–64.
Höckmann,  O.  (1993)  Late  Roman  vessels  from  Mainz, 
Germany.  International Journal of Nautical Archaeology  
22,  125–135.
Höckmann, O. (1994) Der erste römische Schiffsfund am 
Rhein. Das Logbuch 30, 201–207.
Höckmann,   O.  (1995)   Antike   Schiffsfunde   aus   der 
Donau.  In  Deutsche   Gesellschaft   zur  Förderung   der 
Unterwasserarchäologie e.V ., In Poseidons Reich. Archäologie 
unter Wasser .  Zaberns  Bildbände  zur  Archäologie   23. 
Mainz, Verlag Philipp von Zabern, 82–90.
Hüssen,   C.‑M.,  K.  H.  Rieder,   K.  H.  and  Schaaff,   H. 
(1994)  Die  Römerschiffe  in  Oberstimm  –  Ausgrabung 
und  Bergung.  Das archäologische Jahr in Bayern 1994 , 
112–116.
Hüssen, C.‑M., K. H. Rieder, K. H. and Schaaff, H. (1995) 
Römerschiffe an der Donau. Archäologie in Deutschland  
1995/I, 6–10.
Kremer,  A.  (1997)   Die  Bergung   der  Römerschiffe   von 
Oberstimm.   Arbeitsblätter für Restauratoren   30,  325–
328.
Marsden, P . (1993) A hydrostatic study of a reconstruction 
of Mainz Roman ship 9. International Journal of Nautical 
Archaeology 22, 137–141.
Marsden,  P .  (1996)  Classical  Mediterranean  shipbuilding 
outside the Mediterranean. In H. Tzalas (ed.), Tropi IV . 4th 
International Symposium on Ship Construction in Antiquity, 
Athens 1996. Proceedings. Athens, Hellenic Institute for the 
Preservation of Nautical T radition, 297–310.
McKee, E. (1983) Working Boats of Britain. Their Shape and 
Purpose. London, Conway Maritime Press.
Morel, J.‑M. (1987) Frührömische Schiffshäuser in Haltern, 
Hofestatt. Ausgrabungen und Funde in Westfalen-Lippe 5, 
221–249.
Morel, J.‑M. (1988) De Vroeg-Romeinse Versterking te Velsen 
1. Fort en Haven.   Amsterdam,  Academisch  Proefschrift 
Universiteit Amsterdam.
Morrison,  J.  (1991)  Ancient  Greek  measures  of  length  in 
nautical contexts. Antiquity 65, 298–305.
Morrison, J. S. (1993) T riereis: the evidence from Antiquity. 
In Shaw 1993a, 11–20.
Morrison,  J.  S.  (1996)  Greek and Roman Oared warships, 
399–30 BC Oxbow  Monograph  62.  Oxford,  Oxbow 
Books.
Morrison, J. S. and Coates, J. F . (eds) (1989) An Athenian 
T rireme Reconstructed. The British sea trials of Olympias, 1987. 
BAR, International Series, 486. Oxford, Archaeopress.
Morrison,  J.  S.  and  Coates,  J.  F .  (1990)  Die athenische 
Triere. Geschichte und Rekonstruktion eines Kriegsschiffs der 
griechischen Antike. Kulturgeschichte der Antiken Welt 44. 
Mainz, Verlag Philipp von Zabern.
Morrison,  J.  S.,  Coates,  J.  F .  and  Rankov,  N.  B.  (2000) 
The Athenian Trireme: the history and reconstruction of an 
ancient warship 2nd ed. Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press.
Olsen, O. and Crumlin‑Pedersen, O. (1968) The Skuldelev 
ships  (II).  A  report  of  the  final  underwater  excavation 
in  1959  and  the  salvaging   operation   in  1962.   Acta 
Archaeologica (Kobenhavn) 38, 1967, 73–174.
Pferdehirt, B. (1995) Das Museum für Antike Schiffahrt I. Mainz, 
Verlag des Römisch‑germanischen Zentralmuseums.
Rottländer,  R.C.A.  (1992)  Eine  neu  aufgefundene  antike 
Maßeinheit auf dem metrologischen Relief von Salamis. 
Jahreshefte des Österreichischen Archäologischen Instituts in 
Wien 61, 63–68.
Shaw,  T.  (ed.)  (1993a)   The Trireme Project. Operational 
Experience 1987–90. Lessons Learnt.  Oxbow Monograph 
31. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Shaw, T . (1993b) Rowing Olympias: Further Lessons of the 
Sea T rials. In Shaw 1993a, 58–68.
Shetelig,  H.  (1930)  Das  Nydamschiff.  Acta Archaeologica 
(Kobenhavn) 1, 1–30.
Steffy, J. R. (1994) Wooden Ship Building and the Interpretation 
of Shipwrecks. College Station TX, T exas A & M University 
Press.
Timmermann, G. (1956) Vom Einbaum zum Wikingerschiff. 
Schiff und Hafen   1956/V,  403–412;   1956/VII,   602–
612.
===== PAGE 194 =====
24. Uniformity or Multiplicity? On Vitruvius’ interscalmium 181
Weiskittel, S.F . (1989) How to row a trieres. In Morrison and 
Coates 1989, 98–108.
Whitehead,  I,  Coates,  J.  and  Roberts,  O.  (1989)  The  sea 
trials  of  Olympias  at  Poros: August 1987.  In  Morrison 
and Coates 1989, 26–60.
Whitehead, I., Coates, J. and Roberts, O and Morrison, J. 
(1990)  Die  Probefahrten  der  Olympias  von  Poros aus, 
August 1987. In Morrison and Coates 1990, 252–294.
===== PAGE 195 =====
25.  The Effect of Bilge Water on Displacement, 
Vertical Centre of Gravity and Metacentric Height  
of Olympias in the T rial Condition 
Repeated reference in the literature to drying out fleets of 
triremes and the implied importance of preventing fleets 
‘becoming heavy in the water’ before a battle have been 
discussed recently to improve our understanding of the 
qualities and operational limitations of the trireme. In The 
Athenian Trireme, Appendix I, the writer argued that the 
effect of absorption of water by hull timbers could not of 
itself have increased the displacement of a trireme by more 
than about 1 tonne, and that as a worst case the weight 
of bilge water in a leaky but heavily manned ship was not 
likely to be more than about 6 tonnes (Morrison, Coates 
and Rankov 2000, 276–9). Such an increase would not 
reduce maximum speed by more than 2%, whereas loss 
of  speed  through  fouling  would  commonly  have  been 
five times as much. It could, however, have been loss of 
agility that was mainly meant by ancient authors, rather 
than simply speed and the writer indicated in the above 
reference that an increase in mass of 1+ 6, or a total of 
7 tonnes,  i.e. 15% of the dry mass of a trireme, would 
reduce acceleration by that proportion and time to turn 
by about 8%.
  These considerations show that a proper appreciation 
of this important aspect of naval operations with triremes, 
namely  the  effects  of  added  weight  and  bilge  water  on 
their operational effectiveness, cannot be much advanced 
without  experimental  simulation  of  the  condition  in  a 
reconstruction  of  the  ship.  Such  an  experiment  should 
therefore be a prominent part of any further sea trials of 
a trireme reconstruction. 
  Deliberately  letting  water  into  the  manned  ship  is  a 
step which should not be undertaken without adequate 
previous estimation of its effects on flotation and stability, 
and the purpose of this paper is to indicate the nature of 
those effects and their magnitude. First, to estimate the 
greatest  loss  of  stability,  the  effect  of  the  greatest  likely 
amount of crew movement is considered so that it could be 
added to that of the free surface of bilge water in reducing 
stability to arrive at an upper limit to that loss. Then the 
effects of the presence of two amounts of bilge water i.e. up 
John Coates
to the tops of the hull floors and then of a larger amount, 
0.2 m above the tops of the floors, are estimated.
  The calculations upon which these estimates are based 
are  themselves   based  on  the  data  obtained   from  the 
inclining experiment carried out on Olympias in 1990 to 
find the height of her centre of gravity. The calculations 
are at the appendix to this paper and show that:
i)  in  the  trial  condition   with  a  substantial   crew,  each 
weighing 80 kg and sitting or standing vertically when 
the ship rolls, the metacentric height of the ship (GM), 
dry, is 1.13 m and displacement is 42.25 tonnes;
ii)   if, in the same condition, the crew rolled with the ship 
as if solid, the vertical centre of gravity (VCG) would 
rise by 0.14 m, reducing GM by the same amount, i.e. 
12%; if the crew were to lean over with the roll to twice 
its angle, the loss of GM would double, to 0.28 m. or 
25%, reducing it to 0.85m;
iii)   bilge water up to the tops of the floors would add 7.42 
tonnes to displacement, and reduce the height of VCG 
by acting as ballast low in the ship as much as it reduced 
the height of the metacentre (M) owing to the effect of 
its free surface about 2 m wide, so stability would not 
be affected; the ship would sink under the added weight 
by 6.7 cm, which would not greatly affect rowing apart 
from reducing the height of waves in which rowing could 
be effective by about twice that amount, 0.13 m; loss 
of energy through the bilge water sloshing about would 
have to be found by trial;
iv)   bilge water 0.2 m above the tops of the floors would add 
50% to the displacement, making it 69 tonnes, and cause 
the ship to sink 25 cm making rowing ineffective in any 
but near calm conditions; the effect of the free surface 
of the bilge water would be nearly double that of the 
water as ballast, owing to the breadth of the free surface 
being 3 m, and the net loss of GM would be 33%, a loss 
which is limited by the flare of the cross section of the 
trireme; the increase in displacement would render the 
hull in danger of severe straining and structural damage 
in a swell.
A depth of bilge water up to the tops of the floors would be 
===== PAGE 196 =====
25. The Effect of Bilge Water 183
able to be readily bailed and may be judged therefore to have 
been about the depth most likely to have been tolerated in 
leaky triremes in need of drying out, restopping, cleaning 
and recoating underwater. These estimates of the effects of 
bilge water indicate that trials with water admitted into the 
ship to demonstrate the need for a leaky ship to be dried 
out could be carried out safely with relatively little loss of 
stability because the upper limit of the amount of water 
that could be sensibly admitted for trial would be set by 
the effect of sinkage on rowing and by straining of the hull 
in a swell owing to increased displacement. 
  It is therefore considered practicable and safe to carry 
out trials to find out what effects bilge water has on trireme 
operations provided that swell is avoided.
Appendix
The report of the inclining experiment carried out in July 
1990 by British Maritime Technology (Defence Services) 
Ltd  –  Report TR01/R1952  –  found  for  the  light  ship 
condition:
Displacement   25.798 tonnes
(assuming specific gravity of sea water to be 1.025) 
VCG above underside of keel (USK)   1.575 metres
LCG from Displacement Station 23   17.521 metres
Yards were hoisted with sails furled and both rudders were 
in the stowed position.
The trial condition
Added weights on board in the operational state during 
trials are shown in Table 25.1.
From the hydrostatic curves:
Metacentre above USK (KM) 
at displacement 42.25 tonnes  2.90 metre
VCG above USK (KG)  1.77 metre
therefore Metacentric height (GM)  1.13 metre
Effects on stability of bodily movements of people and 
of bilge water
In view of the large proportion of the ship’s weight in the 
trial codition being that of people, and the possibility of 
hull leakage, consider the effect of
i)  all  bodies  leaning  rigidly  with  the  the  ship  instead  of 
standing or sitting vertically and freely as assumed above, 
and
ii)  0.36 m depth of water in the bilge, measured from the 
top of the keel at the main mast (i.e. amidships) giving 
a free surface of mean breadth 2.00 m. 
i) ‘Solid’ people in dry ship
The  rise  in  VCG  may  be  estimated  as  shown  in Table 
25.2.
KM at displacement 42.25 tonnes    2.90 metres
KG          1.91 metres
therefore GM        0.99 metres, 
a loss of 0.14 metre.
If people swayed towards the down side of the ship when 
she heeled so that they heeled twice as much as the ship, 
the  loss  of  GM  would  be  doubled,  reducing  it  to  0.85 
metre, a total loss of GM of 0.28 metre, or 25%.
 








   
   
   
   
   
   
   
T able 25.1.
 









   
   
   
   


  
   
T able 25.2.
===== PAGE 197 =====
John Coates184
ii) Effect on stability of bilge water
i)   Assuming a depth of 0.36 metre of bilge water in the 
ship, volume of added water may be estimated to be not 
more than depth × breadth of water × 2/3 × length:
0.36 m × 2.00 m × 0.67 × 18 m × (0.444–0.074) = 7.24 m3
    0.444
(to allow for volume of floors)   
Increased displacement will be 42.25 + 7.24 × 1.025 = 49.67 
tonnes, an increase of 17.6%.
  The added water’s VCG is 0.54 m above USK, i.e. 1.91 
– 0.54 or 1.37m below the ship’s VCG, so the addition of 
the water will reduce KG by 7.24 × 1.025 × 1.37 = 0.205 m
    49.47
  The  moment  of  inertia  of  the  free  surface  of  the  bilge 
water is approximately
  1/12 × 2.03 × 18 × (0.444–0.074)  = 10 m4
    0.444
Therefore loss of GM owing to bilge water 
= (10 / 49.67) – 0.205 m
= 0.201 – 0.205 = – 0.004 m
and ship’s GM with a ‘rigid’ crew and 0.36 m depth of 
bilge water would be 
0.99 + 0.004 = 0.99 m.
The loss of GM owing to free surface is compensated by 
the fall in VCG, so stability will scarcely be affected. The 
increase in displacement of 7.4 tonnes would cause the 
ship  to  sink  by  6.7  cm  which  would  not  affect  greatly 
rowing  as  regards  wave  clearance,  but  there  would  be 
losses of power owing to bilge water sloshing about fore 
and aft with the stroke.
ii)  If however the depth of bilge water were to increase to, 
say, 0.6 m, the breadth of the free surface would become 
3 m. In that case: 
increase in displacement would be substantial,
i.e. 0.6 × 3.0 × 0.67 × 22 × 1.025 = 27 tonnes, making the 
displacement 69 tonnes. 
The  added  water’s VCG  would  be  0.7  m  above  USK,  i.e. 
1.91–0.7 or 1.21 m below the ship’s VCG and KG of ship 
will fall by 27 × 1.21 = 0.47 m. 
  42 + 27 
The ship’s KM would reduce slightly, by 0.08 m to 2.82 m.
Moment of inertia of free surface would become 1/12 × 
3.03 × 22 = 50 m4, so loss of GM owing to free surface 
would become substantial, 50/ 69 = 0.72 m and the net 
GM would become 0.99–0.08 + 0.47–0.72 = 0.66 m, a 
loss of 33%, which would be noticeable under oar and 
make it necessary to handle the ship with particular care 
under sail.
  Sinkage however in this latter case would be 25 cm and 
have more serious effects, making rowing very difficult and 
ineffective in any but near calm conditions; while the ship 
would be able to be brought to land for repair, she would 
be virtually inoperable. 
Bibliography
Morrison,  J.  S.,  Coates,  J.  F .  and  Rankov,  N.  B.  (2000) 
The Athenian Trireme: the history and reconstruction of 
an ancient warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,   Cambridge 
University Press.
===== PAGE 198 =====
26.  T rireme Life Span and Leakage: a wood 
technologist’s perspective
What  follows,  written  in  1993–94,  is  perhaps  the  first 
detailed exploration of wood‑moisture relationships and 
wood  mechanical  properties  in  the  context  of  mortise‑
and‑tenon  construction  in  the  building  and  operation 
of  triremes,  and  of  ancient  long  ships  in  general.  As  a 
first effort, the author has tried to sketch the main areas 
of investigation in the hope that others will extend and 
improve on this modest beginning. Since the author has 
not been paying attention to maritime archaeology since 
1996,  there  is  almost  certainly   more  recent,  relevant 
evidence of which he is unaware, and he apologizes for its 
omission. An early draft of this document was shared with 
Olympias’  naval  architect,  John  Coates,  who  used  some 
of it with permission in developing his paper, ‘Planking 
tenons  in  ancient  Mediterranean  ships  built  shell  first’ 
(Coates 2001).
  Certain  physical  properties  of  the  wood  species  and 
joinery used to build triremes had an enormous influence 
on their operational limits. This paper explores some critical 
weaknesses and their impacts on trireme construction and 
life span.
Introduction
The top speeds and life span of an ancient trireme would 
have been determined to a large extent by the maximum 
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates
acceptable  leakage.  The  “maximum  acceptable  leakage” 
for ancient trireme crews cannot, of course, be quantified. 
Engineering and common sense tell us the penalty in lost 
effectiveness  due  to  leakage  could  be  severe,  especially 
when coupled with hull deformation, hull roughness and 
the difficulties of rapidly removing water from a trireme’s 
bilge – all factors that would go hand in hand with leakage 
(Morrison and Coates 1989, 69–73; Morrison, Coates and 
Rankov 2000, 276–279). 
  Leakage would have resulted primarily from damage 
by shipworm (see Lipke, above pp. 203–6) and adjacent, 
submerged   planks   crushing   each  other   and  slipping 
longitudinally  over  small  distances.  This  crushing  and 
slippage would eventually destroy any caulking material 
and/or wood‑to‑wood, watertight joints between adjacent, 
moving planks. The planks would slide because:
1.  Some of the approximately 20,000 tenons joining the 
planks together would be installed loose in their mortises, 
or  would  become  so  over  time,  for  reasons  explained 
below (see Figs 26.1, 26.2 26.3, 26.7, 26.8, 26.9). 
2.  Because the strength of the available wood was inadequate 
to  fully  resist  the  shear  forces  created  under  various 
conditions.
Though ancient shipwrights may not have realized it, there 
were two aspects of trireme design and mortise‑and‑tenon 
construction  which  combined  to  form  what  was  most 
likely the weakest point in the structure (the liability of 
triremes to shipworm damage is ignored here, as it has been 
addressed  elsewhere  in  this  volume,  pp.  203–6).  Either 
aspect  could  constitute  a  significant  weakness  by  itself. 
Since the two weakest features related to the same part of 
the hull, in combination they can be presumed to have 
had a great impact on the performance and life span of 
triremes. Furthermore, these two fundamental weaknesses 
could have been difficult to understand and resolve, even 
though the resultant failure was conspicuous. 
  Because  of  their  long,  slender  proportions  and  these 
two weaknesses, triremes would have drooped at the ends 
(in nautical terms, “hogged”) soon after they were built. 
For the same reason they would have leaked sooner than 
Figure 26.1. Differences in a ship’s buoyancy along its length 
relative to weight distribution create shear forces, causing 
components of its skin to want to slide past one another. 
Such forces can lead to the ship sagging at the ends, known as 
“hogging” (Wooden Boat).
===== PAGE 199 =====
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates186
other, stouter ships of the period. Hogging and leaking 
would reduce performance by 1) increasing wetted surface 
(creating greater friction); 2) increasing displacement; 3) 
reducing the height of the oar handle relative to the lowest 
rowers at the ends of the ship during the drive of the stroke, 
thereby making the stroke less powerful (Morrison, Coates 
and Rankov 2000, 277). The two root causes of hogging 
and leaking were:
i)   The tenons in the planks just above the waterline would 
have gaps between the tenon and the mortises, at least 
at  times,  due  to  moisture  cycling  and  probably  from 
compression set (defined below). These same tenons were 
located near the area of the hull subject to the greatest 
shear stress. Therefore the stiffness of the hull was reduced 
in the area where stiffness was needed most. 
ii)   Wood is anisotropic; it has very different stability and 
strength properties in different directions with respect 
to  a  tree’s  vertical,  radial  and  tangential  orientations 
(Fig. 26.7, 26.8 and 26.9). Wood’s maximum shrinkage 
and swelling averages 0.1% longitudinally, 4% radially, 
and  8%  tangentially.  Therefore  transverse   shrinkage 
and  swelling  caused  most  of  the  dimensional  change 
problems with plank leakage, especially since triremes 
were hauled out of the water frequently. Furthermore, 
no available combination of wood species from which 
ancient shipwrights made mortises and tenons had closely 
matched strength properties in the relevant orientations 
relative to grain. In short, trireme tenon material had 
insufficient  strength  in  compression  perpendicular  to 
the grain. As a result, tenons under shear loading were 
crushed by the endgrain of the mortise cut in the planks, 
Figure 26.2. Under shear forces, planks will slide if the tenons are too narrow – e.g. there are gaps between the tenon and 
mortise adjacent to their fore and/or aft faces. T enons installed tightly can develop gaps over time if the tenon is of insufficient 
strength relative to the planking. Such gaps and shear forces can lead to the ship sagging at the ends, known as “hogging,” which 
in turn impacts performance (Drawing: Paul Lipke, based on illustrations by John Coates and Scientific American).
and  this  crushing  could  have  led  to  increased  plank 
slippage and thereby aggravated the leaking and hogging 
problems. 
In order to resist the above mentioned tendency of planks 
to slide, a mortise‑and‑tenon built ship had to have no 
gaps between the fore and aft faces of the tenons, and the 
end grain surfaces of the planking that had been exposed 
within the mortises. 
  What were the factors influencing tightness of tenons? 
They were quality of workmanship (proven in excavated 
shipwrecks to be very high), dimensional change in wood 
due to changes in moisture content, shear forces crushing 
tenons, and compression set (each technical term will be 
defined below as each issue is addressed). After defining 
the nature of this problem and its ramifications in some 
detail, this paper will close with a strategy for mitigating 
these problems. 
Wood properties and dimensional change  
in planks and tenons
Classical shipwrights had to fabricate tens of thousands 
of tight joints and keep them tight in planking shaped to 
create complex curves. They had to do this in a material 
that changes size over time in response to complex moisture 
cycles. 
  Most  people  are  aware  that  a  tight  joint  made  of 
‘green’ timber will open up and become very loose if the 
components are given a chance to dry out. This happens 
because wood is hygroscopic. It continually gains or loses 
===== PAGE 200 =====
26. Trireme Life Span and Leakage 187
moisture  as  necessary  to  find  and  maintain  a  moisture 
content  that  is  in  equilibrium   with  its  surroundings. 
Once  a  piece  of  wood  reaches  an  initial  balance  point 
with its surrounding fluid (i.e. air or water) the wood will 
continually gain or lose water in response to subsequent 
changes in liquid water availability and relative humidity 
(RH).  In  many  applications   this  means  the  wood  is 
constantly shrinking or swelling in response to changes 
in RH; if the RH changes dramatically, the dimensional 
changes can be severe. 
  Generally, the thinner the piece of wood, the faster its 
overall rate of response. A thin, narrow strip of wood that 
is going to be cut up into tenons, let alone an individual 
tenon, will dry very quickly. 
  The wider and thicker the piece of wood, the greater 
the dimensional change. Wide, fat tenons and planks will 
be less dimensionally stable than narrow ones.
  A  trireme  builder  had  to  plan  the  use  and  shaping 
of timber to take advantage both of wood’s hygroscopic 
behaviour and the fact that most woods are much easier 
to work when they have relatively high moisture contents 
(wood’s moisture content (MC) is defined as ‘The weight 
of the water in the cell walls and cavities of wood expressed 
as a percentage of oven‑dry weight’ (Hoadley 1980, 243)). 
The shipwright needed to work such wood when it was 
relatively  green,  but  also  needed  to  prevent  joints  from 
loosening due to shrinkage. These needs were (and are) in 
conflict. T o deal with the conflict, even in boatyards today, 
different parts of a planked wooden hull are built using 
wood in various MC ranges that balance working properties 
and shrinkage rates against the planned application. 
  The  correct   amount   of  moisture   depends   on  the 
properties of the particular species of wood being used, 
the width and plane of cut of the wood being used, the 
macro  and  micro‑climates  in  which  it  will  operate,  the 
duties it will perform, and finish to be applied.
  Some parts of a ship, such as narrow, relatively straight, 
radially cut deck planks that are exposed to the weather 
are best put together with very dry material (MC 6–9%). 
In this way, even after a summer drought when the decks 
have been baked by the sun, the joints will ideally still be 
tight enough that the first rains or seawater on deck will 
not leak through cracks between the deck planks. But as 
we will see, material like decking must not be installed too 
tightly or be laid when it is too dry or compression set can 
occur. Planking, which tends to be wider and have more 
shape,  is  much  more  easily  shaped  and  bent  into  place 
when somewhat green, i.e. at an MC of about 17–20%. 
  These complex considerations have been understood to 
varying degrees by good woodworkers and shipwrights for 
millennia, and even some of the more subtle nuances were 
known to classical shipwrights, as will be demonstrated 
below. Even so, using the best species and plane of cut 
at the correct moisture content for a given application is 
never easy to achieve consistently in real practice. 
  There   have  always   been   delays   in  and  limits   on 
procurement, customer demands for prompt completion, 
complex drying schedules, the vagaries of the weather, etc. 
Meiggs has collected numerous accounts of the difficulties 
ancient   shipwrights   had  with   timber   procurement, 
shipping and processing (Meiggs 1982, 330–40).
Wood species and moisture in triremes during 
construction and operation 
From  the  above  it  is  safe  to  suggest  trireme  planking 
materials  like  Aleppo  and  black  pine  (Pinus  halepensis 
and  P.  nigra)  and  Mediterranean  fir  (Abies  cephalonica) 
(Meiggs  1982,  118)  were  most  probably  worked  when 
somewhat green (MC 17–20%). At this moisture content, 
woodworking is still relatively easy, and enough shrinkage 
has occurred to permit some very desirable swelling when 
the ship is launched. Plank stock to be placed high above 
the  waterline  might  ideally  have  been  fastened  in  place 
when fully air‑dry (MC 8–14%).
  Although  the  rip  saw  was  known  at  least  as  early  as 
the 5th Dynasty in Egypt, in Classical Attica planks and 
tenons were commonly riven (split radially like pie slices) 
from a log, (See Fig. 26.4). Today, when stacked to dry 
under cover, planks of 35–50 mm thickness can go from 
fully green to air‑dry MC of 8–14% in 3–14 weeks (the 
longest period applies to pieces of 50 mm thickness during 
slower, winter drying) (Tsoumis and Voulgaridis, 1980; 
G. Tsoumis and P . K. Kavvouras pers. corr.).
  Tenons holding planks together, which were typically 
made  of  oak  (Quercus  sp.)  or  olive  (Olea  europaea),  are 
small  enough  that  they  would  dry  to  8–14%  MC  very 
quickly (in days to a week or so) after cutting to shape, 
and indeed they needed to be as dry as practical so that 
they  would  not  shrink  further  after  being  fitted  tightly 
into mortises. Clearly, it would have been relatively easy 
for  trireme  builders  to  insure  tenons  would  not  shrink 
after fitting. 
  Given these moisture contents, when first launched, an 
increase in MC of 14% or more would then occur for the 
planking below the waterline as MC increased to the fibre 
saturation  point.  This  increase  in  MC  would  cause  the 
planks and tenons to swell. Since they were underwater, 
they would stay swollen tight until the ship was hauled 
out, i.e. taken off active duty for some weeks or stored for 
the winter. The planks and tenons would swell different 
amounts in different directions depending on the species 
used and grain direction, but the important point is that 
too  much  swelling  could  lead  to  leakage  when  planks 
swelled against planks and crushed themselves, or when 
tenons swelled against the very strong, stable endgrain of 
the plank (in the mortise) and essentially crushed itself.
	 It is necessary at this point to make a brief but important 
digression  concerning  tenon  species  and  properties.	 A 
number   of  published   archaeological   reports   of  early 
shipwrecks have specified wreck tenons were made of a 
particular sub‑species of the red‑oak group, T urkey oak, 
Quercus cerris . These reports do not state on what basis 
this identification of the sub‑species was made. 
===== PAGE 201 =====
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates188
  Unfortunately,  the  different  sub‑species  within  each 
of the white and red oak groups cannot be differentiated 
from  each  other  using  the  harvested  wood  alone,  even 
under a microscope or with chemical analysis. Access to 
twigs, buds or leaves of the tree are necessary in order that, 
for example, the various red oak species to be identified. 
Since  leaves,  buds  and  twigs  from  the  trees  which  the 
tenons came from are no longer available, the attribution 
of T urkey oak in wreck tenons must be viewed with some 
scepticism.
  Despite  this  uncertainty,   Turkey  oak  examples   are 
included in this paper for two reasons: 1) the wood was 
common  in  the  region  in  antiquity,  and  so  was  highly 
likely to be used for tenons; and 2) T urkey oak is generally 
slightly  more  dense,  strong  and  dimensionally  unstable 
than all the other available oak species, and so deserves 
to be considered, but considered separately. 
  As it happens, T urkey oak’s strength and other properties 
are closer to the averages for the white oak group, Quercus 
robur, pendulata, etc., than those of the red oak group to 
which it belongs taxonomically. Unless stated otherwise, 
this paper uses either the white oak group or T urkey oak, 
whichever will give the more conservative values for the 
issue under consideration.
  As stated above, wood swells and shrinks about twice as 
much tangentially as it does radially. Contrary to Coates’ 
assertion in his paper on planking tenons (Coates 1996, 
6) stronger, heavier woods such as those used in tenons 
swell more (not less) than lighter woods (Hoadley 1980, 
74;  USDA  1987,  3–13  to  3–15).  Fig.  26.3  illustrates 
three possible grain orientations for tenons, ranging from 
pure radial and tangential orientations to an intermediate 
one. 
  Tenon  “A”  has  its  annual  rings  oriented  to  run  fore 
and aft. This is the most stable orientation under moisture 
cycling,  and  also  provides  the  most  resistance  to  shear 
forces,  since  radial  faces  of  the  tenon  are  the  strongest 
available. Tenon “B” has its annual rings oriented to run 
inboard and outboard. This is the least stable orientation 
under   moisture   cycling,   and  also  provides   the  least 
resistance  to  shear  forces,  since  shear  forces  are  acting 
on  relatively  weak  tangential  grain.  It  is  therefore  the 
orientation most likely to result in gaps between the tenon 
and the mortise, all else being equal.
Figure 26.3. Three possible grain orientations for tenons, ranging from pure radial and tangential annual ring orientation 
to an intermediate one. T enon “A” has its annual rings oriented to run fore and aft. This is the most stable orientation under 
moisture cycling, and also provides the most resistance to shear forces, since radial faces of the tenon are the strongest available. 
T enon “B” has its annual rings oriented to run inboard and outboard. This is the least stable orientation under moisture 
cycling, and also provides the least resistance to shear forces, since shear forces are acting on relatively weak tangential grain. 
It is therefore the orientation most likely to result in gaps between the tenon and the mortise, all else being equal. T enon “C” 
has its mixed orientation of its annual rings, giving intermediate stability and strength performance. See also Figure 26.6. 
(Drawing: Paul Lipke).
Figure 26.4. Riven boards, which readers can conceptualize 
as pie slices, can provide tenon material with annual rings 
in either radial or tangential orientation (Drawing: Paul 
Lipke).
===== PAGE 202 =====
26. Trireme Life Span and Leakage 189
  To  date  there  is  very  little  archaeological   evidence 
which indicates whether Classical shipwrights consistently 
fabricated  tenons  with  the  tenon’s  tangential  or  radial 
planes oriented fore and aft. The orientation of grain of 
the tenons was not noted in the Kyrenia Wreck. Personal 
communication with Honor Frost indicates the Marsala 
tenons were aligned so shear forces acted on radial faces, 
as would likely be most common with tenons cut from 
riven bolts. This author unsuccessfully sought such data 
from the Ma’agan Michel and Marseille wrecks. 
  For the purposes of understanding the effect of moisture 
on the mortise‑and‑tenon joints of a trireme, it is useful to 
conceptually divide the hull into three distinct horizontal 
sections. The first section is the saturated planking at and 
below the waterline. The second section of planking is just 
above the waterline, and could experience wide swings in 
moisture content due to waves, mooring positions relative 
to the drying effects of the wind and the sun, and so forth. 
Lastly, the upper topsides will generally stay ‘dry.’ In reality 
these zones form a continuous moisture gradient. 
  Data  on  plank   and  tenon   moisture   contents   was 
collected aboard Olympias during 1993 and 1994 (see Table 
26.1).  They  confirm,  as  indicated  above,  that  moisture 
contents ranged from well above the fibre saturation point 
to  ‘air‑dry’  at  about  12%  depending  on  1)  the  height 
above and below the waterline, and 2) the depth probed 
in the planking and tenons as measured from the inside 
surface  of  the  hull.  (The  fibre  saturation  point  (FSP)  is 
‘The  condition  of  moisture  content  where  cell  walls  are 
fully saturated, but the cell cavities are empty of free water. 
Free water is moisture held in the cell cavities of the wood, 
not  bound  in  the  cell  wall’  (Hoadley,  1980,  241).  Most 
 

    
    
    
    
    
    
 

    
    
    
    
    
    

 

    
    
    
    
    
    
 

    
    
    
    
    
    











H = well over fibre saturation
M: moderately over fibre saturation
L = slightly over fibre saturation
* Adjusted for Oak, Quercus
** Ship had been in the water 7 days, after 10 days exposed to sea 
air and 2–3 weeks afloat in Greece
*** 1st strake above waterline was inaccessible due to obstruction 
by wale
T able 26.1. Olympias’ Plank and T enon Moisture Content.
Note: Moisture content readings taken in Greece during April, 1994, 
when the ship had been out of  the water at dockside but not under 
cover all winter were almost all over fibre saturation, except a few 
in the mid-20s, at random heights and depths of  probe (it was not 
clear of  the ship had recently been washed or hosed down).
===== PAGE 203 =====
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates190
species have fibre saturation moisture contents of around 
28%. Under this condition, all the water in the wood is 
‘bound’ water held within the cell walls. It is the loss or 
gain of this bound water, at moisture contents below 28%, 
that results in wood shrinking or swelling. For comparison, 
‘air‑dry’  wood  in  northern  temperate  climates  generally 
has a moisture content of 12–14%.) Olympias, built and 
launched near Athens, Greece has been exposed to mean 
relative humidities between 47% and 75%, resulting in 
moisture contents (MC) for air‑dry wood of between 8.3% 
and 14% (National Climactic Data Center/NOAA Station 
16716; Hoadley 1980, 69; Tsoumis and Voulgaridis 1980; 
G. Tsoumis and P .K. Kavvouras pers. corr.). Any difference 
between modern relative humidities and those experienced 
in the forested Mediterranean of antiquity would not be 
significant in the context of the arguments that follow.
  Given these climatic conditions, the likely dimensional 
changes to a trireme’s oak tenons could fall anywhere in 
the ranges indicated below in Table 26.2a and 26.2b. The 
ranges for other species which were used for tenons have 
also been calculated.
  How much a piece of wood, such as a tenon, will shrink 
or swell as a result of shifts in moisture content can be 
estimated for a given shaped timber for a given species by 
the following formula. It is important to note that any 
individual piece of wood can vary as much as 50% from 
the species’ statistical norm.
Df = Di*S(MCf‑MCi/FSP)
where:
  Df = final dimension
  Di = initial Dimension
S  (specified  as  St  or  Sr)  =  the  percent  shrinkage  for  a 
particular  species  in  the  tangential  plane  (St)  or  radial 
plane (Sr) as moisture content is reduced from green to 
oven‑dry
MCf = final Moisture Content (MC) 
  MCi = initial Moisture Content 
FSP = Fibre Saturation Point at which (and above which) 
dimensions are stable, with FSP typically considered to 
be a moisture content of 28%.
Here are two examples: 
European   oaks,   Quercus   robur ,  pendulata ,  etc.  have 
tangential shrinkage (St) of 7.5% and a radial shrinkage 
(Sr)  of  4.0%.  The  tenons  of  Olympias  are  37  mm  wide 
when air‑dry at 12% MC. If MCi is 12%, and MCf is 
28%,  unrestrained  swelling  along  the  width  of  such  an 
oak tenon as a result of a likely maximum MC swing of 
26% will be between 1.3 mm and 2.5 mm depending on 
the plane of cut of the tenon.
T urkey oak has a tangential shrinkage (St) of 10.5% and 
a  radial  shrinkage  (Sr)  of  4.5%.  Unrestrained  swelling 
along  the  width  of  a T urkey  oak  tenon  as  a  result  of  a 
likely maximum MC swing of 26% will thus be between 
1.5 mm and 3.6 mm depending on the plane of cut of 
the tenon. In both cases, such unrestrained dimensional 
changes are large enough to be highly significant. 
Swelling of tenons that are restrained because they are tight 
in their mortises when initially installed (low MCi) would 
be a different matter, and will be discussed below.
  Tenons in the planking below the waterline would stay 
at fibre saturation point while the ship was in the water. 
The data in Table 26.2a and 26.2b show the only possible 
way in which they could be loose in their mortises after 
launch would be if they were undersized by a millimetre 
or more and fully saturated when first fitted.
  High above the waterline, equilibrium moisture contents 
for planks would be fairly stable within an annual mean 
range of 6%, so unrestrained dimensional change even for 
the more dimensionally unstable 37 mm T urkey oak tenon 
would be barely measurable, from 0.36–0.83 mm.
  A different picture appears if we apply this formula to 
the wet/dry zone immediately above the waterline, up to 
the  1  metre  maximum  wave  height  it  appears  triremes 
could  most  probably  regularly  handle  (see  Shaw,  above  
p. 73). In this area, annual moisture cycling can be extreme, 
and changes in MC of 22% could result in unrestrained 
dimensional swelling of 1.2–2.2 mm for European oak, and 
1.3–3.0 mm for a T urkey oak tenon of 37 mm. The MC of 
wet/dry zone tenons at any given time would depend on: 
•	 the particular tenon’s height above waterline, 
•	 size of the waves encountered in recent periods, 
•	 whether  it  had  rained  recently  (in  much  of  Greece  it 
virtually never rains in the summer) 
•	 relative humidity of the air
•	 how easily any rain and/or seawater were wicked into 
plank seams and mortises
•	 how long a pocket of water in a mortise would take to 
dry out
•	 the season of the year.
Table 26.1 indicates, however, that a wide range of moisture 
content values can be found in the wet/dry zone over time 
and even at any one period of time. It is quite probable 
that under the conditions which were likely to exist when 
triremes were re‑launched into service, gaps of 1–3 mm 
or more between tenon and mortise could be common as 
little as 6–12 inches (15.2 cm) above the waterline.
  Gaps would occur whenever there had been time and 
dry enough conditions for the water trapped in the pockets 
of tenons to dry out. The most common, gap‑producing 
conditions were probably 1) the ship had been in a shipshed 
and thus kept dry; and 2) the ship was hauled out without 
a shipshed in the dry season.
  Such  gaps  are  one  of  the  root  causes  of  weakness  in 
triremes as we have come to understand them. Gaps would 
probably  have  greatly  reduced  the  resistance  to  sliding 
between planks.
Planks, caulking and leakage
Why is resistance to shear between planks so important? 
Why would gaps between tenons and mortises have such 
a strong, negative effect? If the planks of a trireme were 
to slide back and forth past each other in the fore and aft 
===== PAGE 204 =====
26. Trireme Life Span and Leakage 191
directions, they would eventually destroy or ‘spit out’ any 
caulking material that had been inserted between them, 
or would cause any watertight, wood‑to‑wood joints to 
leak from abrasion. 
  We do not know for certain if triremes were caulked, and 
if so what materials were used between the plank seams. 
On one hand, pitch‑soaked flax fibre may have been used, 
or shipwrights may have relied purely on wood‑to‑wood, 
watertight fits between planks. If this sounds unbelievable, 
it is worth noting woodworking of this type and quality 
could  be  found  in  the  mid  20th  century  among  some 
wooden boat builders.
  If a shipwright felt that normal swelling between planks 
would  not  provide  a  sufficiently  tight  joint,  he  could 
resort to making a caulked seam between each plank. This 
generally involves removing a portion of the wood from one 
edge of one plank along each seam to form a shallow ‘Y.’
  Morrison and Coates contains an excellent summary of 
the evidence about caulking in triremes (Morrison, Coates 
and Rankov 2000, 184–6). Coates and Morrison conclude, 
quite rightly, that we do not know for certain if caulking 
was used. However, of all the evidence they review, one 
piece seems particularly compelling to this author because 
of  his  background   in  wooden  ship  construction   and 
  
















     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     



** Tenons might commonly have a mix of  tangential and radial grain. In these cases, shrinkage and compression set values would fall 
between the pure radial and tangential values.
T able 26.2a. Dimensional Change and Compression Set in T enons and Planks.
===== PAGE 205 =====
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates192
maintenance.  A  fourth‑century  speech  of  Demosthenes 
(47.20) reads,
It happened that there was a dispatch of triereis and an 
emergency expedition speedily mobilized. There was not 
enough gear in the dockyard...What was more there was 
not available for purchase in Piraeus a supply of sailcloth 
and stuppeion and ropes, all of which are needed for getting 
a trieres ready for sea.
Stuppeion  has  been  translated  to  mean  raw  flax  or  old 
rope. Raw flax or old rope can be used for caulking. Even 
today, old natural rope fibre is sometimes teased apart and 
used for caulking the seams of wooden ships and boats. In 
considering whether stuppeion means caulking material, it 
is important to ask what other uses essential for getting a 
trireme ready for sea could be found for fibre that might 
be purchased in some form other than rope (rope is clearly 
specified, therefore stuppeion is something else). Here are 
the only other plausible meanings of stuppeion the author 
(by every admission not a Classicist) can conceive of that 
might fit this context:
i)   Stuppeion could mean small diameter lines, such as are 
used for lashing, mending and the myriad odd chores 
aboard ship. These range from about 1.5 mm to 7.5 mm 
in diameter, and are known to sailors and riggers today 
as “marline” and “housline.” It is arguable how essential 
this material is. Furthermore, larger diameter lines can 
always be unlaid (unraveled) to get smaller material for 
this purpose, especially in an emergency.
ii)  Stuppeion could mean chafing gear such as the binding 
on the shaft of an oar in the area near the thole pin that 
protects it against chafe. This is certainly not absolutely 
essential, and leather or cloth will readily substitute.
  
















     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     



** Tenons might commonly have a mix of  tangential and radial grain. In these cases, shrinkage and compression set values would fall 
between the pure radial and tangential values.
T able 26.2b. Dimensional Change and Compression Set in T enons and Planks.
===== PAGE 206 =====
26. Trireme Life Span and Leakage 193
This author finds neither of these possibilities convincing, 
and suggests that stuppeion might refer to caulking.
  John Coates has suggested 1) the absence of caulking in 
the few classical shipwrecks found to date ‘may well be true 
evidence of its actual absence’ and 2) thin planks with many 
tenons would have very little plank thickness remaining 
in which to create a seam for caulking (Morrison, Coates 
and Rankov 2000, 185). This author won’t argue with the 
first point; the second justifies a comment. 
  Fibre‑caulked modern wooden ships typically devote 
⅓ to ½ to of their plank thickness to the caulking seam. 
While the thin planking of triremes would most probably 
not have been able to accommodate a deep caulking seam, 
a modest caulking seam could certainly be made, even in 
much thinner planking. The author has used thin fibre 
caulking in seams as shallow as 5 mm in planking of just 
10  mm  thickness  in  replicas  of  19th  century  working 
watercraft. Olympias’ 40 mm thick planks could have been 
caulked even if her tenons had been made thicker in order 
to deal with shear problems discussed below. This author 
does not believe the use of tenons would have prevented 
the use of caulking.
  Whether  caulking   was  used  in  triremes   or  not,  if 
the planks were to slide back and forth, the ship would 
eventually leak. Over time leakage would get worse until 
the ship became unusable, especially given the difficulties 
of bailing water in a trireme. 
  It is hard to imagine any arrangement of the hull bracing 
and  rowing  furniture  that  would  not  have  lots  of  cross 
beams, oars and bodies in the way of a crewman trying to 
toss water up over the side from down in the bilge with a 
bucket, pumps being as yet unknown. Human chains to 
pass a bucket up over the side are possible, but the crew 
needs to be rowing, not bailing, during battle. How easily 
and quickly would serious leakage and waterlogging occur? 
As will be shown, poor construction and shipworms aside, 
it would depend largely on how often a ship was hauled 
out and how rapidly it was put back into hard service after 
re‑launch. (In considering triremes being slower from being 
‘heavy  in  the  water’  John  Coates  (Morrison,  Coates  and 
Rankov 2000, 277; cf. Coates, above pp. 182–4) assumes 
‘as a worst case that all timbers in the hull below the water 
were to be waterlogged...’ T rue waterlogging (i.e. to the point 
where wood will sink if dropped into water) is difficult to 
achieve in a working vessel. Even so, waterlogging would 
constitute only one of the seven tons of water Coates adds to 
a trireme’s dry displacement to estimate the effect of ‘heavy’ 
hull conditions, the other six tons being free‑flowing bilge 
water that has risen to the top of the floor timbers.)
Plank slippage due to shear and unequal tenon 
and mortise strength
The mortise and tenon system is the primary means for 
preventing  movement  in  the  face  of  significant   shear 
forces between planks. The magnitudes of the horizontal 
shear forces result from the shape, construction and forces 
exerted  upon  the  vessel.  Just  as  a  chain  can  only  be  as 
strong as its weakest link, for a mortise and tenon system 
to resist these forces for as long as possible, the strengths 
of the mortises and tenons should be nearly equal. It is 
apparent  in  what  follows  that  such  equality  of  strength 
was not the case in triremes of antiquity. As a result, the 
mortise and tenon technology that made it possible for 
ancient shipwrights to fit 170 men into a 120' foot ship 
was also the vessel’s weak point.
  In  order  to  understand   how  well  and  how  long  a 
trireme’s tenons might resist such forces, we need to take 
another look at the materials involved. As stated earlier, 
anisotropic materials like wood have physical properties 
that are different in different directions relative to their 
structure. The difference in radial and tangential swelling 
mentioned above in respect to moisture cycling of tenons 
is a good example.
  More  generally,  the  different  physical  properties  and 
resultant behaviours depend on 1) the nature of the forces 
involved, 2) their directions relative to the grain, 3) the 
particular anatomical structure of the species under load, 
and  4)  the  moisture  content  of  the  timber  under  load. 
Furthermore,  due  to  variations  in  growing  conditions 
and parts of the tree used, any given piece of timber may 
vary by as much as ±50% of the established mean for a 
given species and strength property. Any assessment of the 
construction, repairs or mechanics of a wooden structure 
must take each of these factors into account. 
  Four other factors must be borne in mind. First, data 
on certain physical properties is not always available for the 
exact species under consideration. However, it is common 
practice in wood science to identify anatomically identical 
or very similar species and use those figures as a basis for 
analysis.  This  has  been  done  here,  substitutions  being 
noted in Tables 26.1 and 26.3, which see.
  Secondly, in some cases there have been very significant 
reductions in published strength values for timber as its 
quality has declined. Reductions, occasionally as high as 
40%,  can  be  found  in  some  important  species  cited  in 
two United States Forest Service Wood Handbooks. These 
values are based on identical tests conducted and published 
just 20 years apart. 
  It is beyond the scope of this work to quantify how 
much weaker or stronger certain species may have been in 
ancient times. But ancient vessels were probably (though 
not necessarily) blessed with timber of considerably better 
strength and durability (resistance to decay).
  Thirdly, due to differences in the proportions of certain 
types  of  cells,  slow‑grown  versus  fast‑grown  trees  may 
generate wood with very different properties. For example, 
slowly‑grown conifers are generally stronger, swell/shrink 
more, and are more durable (resistant to decay) than the 
same species grown more quickly on open woodland that 
has  been  harvested  (or  burned)  in  the  recent  past.  The 
former  are  like  the  pines  and  firs  that  had  to  fight  for 
light in the mature forests of the ancient Mediterranean 
region. 
===== PAGE 207 =====
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates194
  Conversely   (due,  once  again,  to  differences   in  the 
proportions   of  cell  types)   slowly‑grown,  ring‑porous 
hardwoods   like  the  oaks  used  for  tenons   in  ancient 
Mediterranean ships might have been weaker and more 
dimensionally stable than modern ones that grew more 
quickly. If in fact ancient conifers were stronger and oaks 
weaker than they are today, the strength inequality between 
planks and tenons discussed below would be even worse 
than that presented, though the likelihood of compression 
set might be reduced slightly.
  Finally, wood is less strong, less stiff and more plastic 
when it is wet.
  Because a chain is only as strong as its weakest link, 
manufacturers try to make chains in which every link is 
equally strong. The links’ shape, dimensions and processing 
maximize  uniformity  and  strength.  Mortise‑and‑tenon 
joints  in  triremes   need  to  be  like  well‑made  chains. 
Specifically, the surfaces of the mortises and the tenons 
that bear against each other should have a strength ratio of 
one to one. In such a case, as adjacent planks try to slide 
past each other, each part of the system resists equally. 
  At first glance, the reader might think that the simplest 
way  to  equalize  strength  between  tenons  and  mortises 
would  be  to  use  the  same  wood  oriented  in  the  same 
direction, i.e. fir planking containing fir tenons with the 
tenon’s  grain  running  longitudinally  along  the  hull,  in 
the same direction as the grain of the planks. This would 
be  a  good  solution  if  fore‑and‑aft  shear  was  the  main 
or  only  significant  force  tenons  had  to  withstand.  But 
longitudinal shear forces only become an issue after much 
more common and substantial forces perpendicular to the 
hull have been dealt with successfully.
  Think of it this way. If you build a stone or brick wall, 
your first worry is not about it falling down in a direction 
parallel to its length. You are concerned with perpendicular 
forces, from the side or above. Similarly, trireme tenons 
had to withstand significant tension perpendicular to the 
hull:
i)   during construction (when planks set at different angles 
with rows of tenons in their mortises were being driven 
together)
ii)   from the inward thrust of the water against the hull
iii)   when coming up against a dock or other side loading of 
the tenons
iv)   during ramming. 
Unfortunately,   wood  is  remarkably   weak  in  tension 
perpendicular to grain and so would be quite incapable 
of withstanding these forces if the grain of the tenons ran 
fore and aft.
  Since   wood   is  much   stronger   in  shear   parallel, 
compression  parallel  and  compression  perpendicular  to 
grain  than  in  tension  perpendicular  to  grain,  the  next 
obvious alternative is to rotate the tenons 90 degrees so 
their grain runs perpendicular to that of the planks. Under 
this arrangement, sliding planks exert a force on the tenons 
that creates compression perpendicular to grain. 
  The planks are massive relative to the tenons and there 
is a great deal of solid wood left between the mortises. In 
addition, wood is so much stronger in compression parallel 
to grain (the loading of the mortise sides, which is acting 
just like a weight pressing down on a column) compared 
even to compression perpendicular to grain (the loading of 
the tenon) that there is virtually no danger of the planks 
splitting. In fact, in this arrangement it is hard to achieve 
anything approaching a one‑to‑one strength ratio without 
careful species selection.
 













    


   
   


   
   


   
   


   
   


   
   


   
   


   
   





T able 26.3. Wood Strengths Relative to Grain Direction.
* Applies to tenons restrained from fore and aft movement as the planks slip, or bottom of  mortise if  tenons rotate as planks slip in shear.
** Applies at the endgrain of  the mortise where they contact the fore and aft faces of  the tenons, and to the endgrain at the corners of  the tenons if  the 
tenons k=jam against the bottom of  the mortise if  they rotate.
Sources: Handbook of  Hardwoods, HMSO; Wood Handbook, USDA 1987; 1974; 1955 editions; WoodenBoats nos 74 and 87.
===== PAGE 208 =====
26. Trireme Life Span and Leakage 195
  It  is  clear  from  Classical  writings  about  ship  timber 
(Meiggs 1982; Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000) and 
studies of the species used for planks and tenons in excavated 
shipwrecks, that Classical shipwrights understood, at least 
at some level, the need to make these joints stiff. Dense 
hardwoods are used for tenons, lighter conifers are used 
for planking. If a preferred species was not available for 
a  given  application  they  made  sensible  substitutions.  A 
good example of this is the occasional use of olive (Olea 
sp.)  in  place  of T urkey  oak  tenons  in  the  Marsala  ship. 
Contemporary  wood  science  can  begin  to  quantify  the 
problem of matching tenon and mortise strength.
  Excavated shipwrecks and the writings of Aristophanes, 
Theophrastus  and  others  identify  the  species  used  for 
planks and tenons. In the worst cases, ancient shipwrights 
were creating mortise‑and‑tenon combinations resulting 
in strength ratios of 4:1 or worse. T riremes built to these 
standards would very likely have had shorter, less useful 
life spans. Casson cites triremes lasting 20 years, though 
from the text it is clear this was exceptional (Casson 1971, 
90). From this and the author’s experience it is fair to say 
eight to fourteen years might have been an average working 
life for a well‑maintained trireme in hard service. Badly 
matched tenons would shorten this period. 
  Let us consider the worst ratios, mortises and tenons 
of  ancient  triremes  built  of  any  true  Mediterranean  fir 
and white oak respectively. As detailed in Table 26.3, the 
strength ratio between the mortise’s loading in compression 
parallel to grain and the tenon’s loading under compression 
perpendicular to grain is about four to one. That is, the 
endgrain of the fir mortise is typically four times stronger 
than the side grain of the white oak tenon. 
  With this arrangement the tenons in the hull will give 
way first when the joint is subjected to horizontal shear 
loading  (or  moisture‑induced  swelling  under  restraint). 
Because of this, gaps will form between the tenons and 
their mortises and reduced resistance to shear will result 
upon  drying  or  further  flexing  of  the  hull.  Eventually 
the ship will appear to sag at the ends and then leak (see 
again, Figs 26.1, 26.2 and 26.3). Differences in a ship’s 
buoyancy along its length relative to weight distribution 
create these shear forces, causing components of its skin, 
such as wooden planks, to want to slide past one another. 
Such forces can lead to such sagging at the ends, known 
as “hogging.”
  Our  projections  of  the  ratio  experienced  in  triremes 
can be refined if we assume the oak tenons are wet during 
a trireme’s operations, and that in better ships they were 
combined  with  (wet)  Mediterranean  silver  fir  planking. 
The ratio then increases to 4.7:1. The oak tenons placed 
in the stronger (but heavier) pine planks would be stressed 
even more. 
  In  the  Olympias  reconstruction,  tenons  of  live  oak, 
Quercus virginiana, were used instead of European oak, 
Quercus sp .  because  the  former  is  much  stronger,  and 
because the project’s managers knew the reconstruction 
was such a large investment they could not take the risk 
that  its  life  span  and/or  performance   be  prematurely 
reduced. The use of live oak makes sense in terms of the 
hull stiffness and longevity of expensive reconstructions like 
Olympias, but its performance should not obscure (as John 
Coates points out in Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 
201–204)  the  very  real  crushing  problems  the  ancients 
had to confront. For the planking Douglas fir, Pseudotsuga 
menziiesi, was used because historically correct species like 
Mediterranean fir were not available in sufficient quality 
and lengths. This combination results in a ratio of about 
1.7:1
  From  the  above  material  it  is  clear  mortise‑to‑tenon 
strength ratios for Classically available woods is estimated 
to be about 4:1. In general, the sides of tenons get crushed 
long  before  the  end  grain  of  the  mortise  is  deformed. 
Hogging and leakage were inevitable; we can now examine 
the forces involved and how quickly they occurred.
Analysis of shear forces on tenons
Wooden‑planked ships are often incorrectly analyzed by 
engineers and discussed in reference texts as if they were 
single, simple beams. In fact, a series of flexible beams laid 
one on top of another (like a leaf spring) has been proven 
to be a much better model (Evans 1983; Coates 1996). 
  John  Coates   developed   a  mathematical   model   to 
explore what this means for Olympias: ‘In this simplified 
model of a mortise‑and‑tenon joint between two planks, 
subject to shear force, S per tenon, pressure between the 
mortise and the edge of the tenon is assumed to extend 
from plank edge to peg‑level, i.e. a line bisecting the peg. 
Linear distribution is also assumed. Forces required for the 
rotational equilibrium of the plank may be neglected.’ In 
summary, the maximum shear force per tenon is estimated 
to be 1730 Newtons, and the maximum compressive stress 
on the tenon 10.9 N/mm2. This maximum compressive 
load  on  the  tenon  is  more  than  twice  as  great  as  the 
proportional limit of compression perpendicular to grain 
of white oak at the fibre saturation point, and 1.2 times 
greater at 12% moisture content. By comparison, this force 
is only half the compressive strength parallel to grain of a 
wet pine plank mortise, and one quarter when the mortise 
is dry. Clearly, the tenons will be crushed.
  The  ash,  mulberry  and  elm  to  which  Theophrastus 
ascribes special strength for ship parts (Meiggs 1982, 118) 
do  not  today  exhibit  strength  values  sufficiently  greater 
than  the  deciduous  oaks  to  make  any  difference  in  the 
crushing problem if tenons were made from these species. 
It  is  impossible  to  offer  data  supporting  Theophrastus’ 
assertion. 
  It  does  not  seem  unreasonable  to  assert  that  ancient 
shipwrights,   observing  leakage  and  crushed  tenons  in 
triremes under repair, would naturally make the tenons 
of subsequently‑built triremes bigger and more numerous 
in  an  effort  to  reduce  the  load  per  tenon.  In  indirect 
confirmation,   later  mortise‑and‑tenon  built  merchant 
shipwrecks generally have proportionally thicker tenons 
===== PAGE 209 =====
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates196
spaced more closely than those of earlier periods (see Table 
26.2a and 26.2b). 
Compression set due to swelling of adjacent 
planks
‘When ships that have been built with green timber sweat 
out their moisture, they contract and develop cracks. There 
is nothing more dangerous for sailors.’ (Vegetius 4.36)
‘For  carpentry,   the  oldest   wood   is  best   ...  But  for 
shipbuilding,   because   of  the  need  for  bending,   it  is 
necessary to use sappier wood (though when it is a case 
of stopped joints the drier the wood the better). The fact 
is that (hull) planking shows gaps [between the planks] 
when it is new, but when the ship is launched the planks 
absorb water, close up and are watertight, except in the 
case of timber which has been completely dried out. In 
that condition planks do not make a close joint, or not as well 
as they would if the wood was not completely dried out.’[my 
italics] (Theophrastus 4.2.8, Aldine ed.)
John Coates (Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 182) 
wrote ‘The text of the foregoing [Theophrastus] passage 
is uncertain in places...’ but recognized that Theophrastus 
and Vegetius are clearly defining the need to use planking 
stock which is dry enough to swell and close up cracks when 
launched, but not too dry. Modern shipwrights restate the 
problem  by  specifying  planking  stock  be  conditioned 
to  between  10–18%  moisture  content  (depending  on 
climate,  application  and  species)  because  such  stock  is 
both  moist  enough  to  be  pliable  and  sufficiently  below 
fibre saturation point as to be capable of sufficient swelling 
to close up gaps. 
  It is the final part of Theophrastus’ passage that seems 
unclear. Coates takes him literally and writes of wood that 
is ‘not so dry that it will not take up water when immersed.’ 
There is no such thing as normal dry wood that is so dry 
it will not take up moisture. Therefore Theophrastus must 
mean something else.
  A more likely interpretation is that Theophrastus’ final 
comment seems to be the earliest known description of a 
phenomenon that has plagued woodworkers throughout 
history and into the present. It is called compression set.
  Compression set occurs when wood tries to swell more 
than about 1% (the limit of elastic strain, i.e. deformation) 
while the wood is restrained in some way. When the wood 
tries  to  swell  beyond  this  limit  the  cells  get  flattened 
and/or  displaced  so  that  when  the  wood  shrinks  again, 
the piece of wood has a smaller dimension along the axis 
of  restraint  than  it  had  initially.  Subsequent  re‑wetting 
will not produce as much swelling as occurred in the first 
moisture increase. More precisely, ‘compression set’ is that 
portion of the original dimension that is not recovered. 
Swelling under restraint is similar to compressing wood. 
If the elastic limit is exceeded, ‘...upon re‑drying the piece 
“unloads”  itself  by  shrinking  to  a  smaller  than  original 
diameter’ (Hoadley 1980, 114).
  Swelling   under   restraint   could   visibly   distort   the 
anatomical structure of ring porous oak, so that the large 
earlywood  pores  are  squashed  and  large  rays  would  be 
‘bent’ when viewed transversely. Fig. 26.5 shows before 
and after photomicrographs of compression set in catalpa, 
which has a ring porous cell structure similar to white oak. 
In the ‘after’ example, the large rays, running left to right, 
are more bent and curvy. This is mentioned in the hope 
that investigation of tenons by nautical archaeologists of 
known and future projects will include examination for 
this critical evidence of compression damage and standards 
of ancient ship construction.
  Virtually everyone has experienced compression set in 
the form of loose rungs in wooden chairs. The forces and 
factors are very similar to those in a trireme’s planking or 
mortise and tenon joints. Imagine a chair with rungs let 
into sockets in the chair’s legs. It has been manufactured 
during  the  winter  in  a  modern,  heated  (dry)  furniture 
factory  or  woodworker’s  shop.  The  air  in  the  shop  has 
low relative humidity, and the joints are machined to fit 
A B
Figure 26.5. Photomicrograph of compression set in catalpa. “A” is before, “B” after swelling under restraint and re-drying. 
Catalpa has a ring porous cell structure similar to white oak. Note in “B” how the large rays, running left to right, are more 
bent and curvy than in “A” (Photo: Hoadley, 1969).
===== PAGE 210 =====
26. Trireme Life Span and Leakage 197
tightly and glued in place. During storage and/or shipping 
and/or in your home the chair is cycled back and forth 
through relative humidities ranging from perhaps 90% to 
30% (MC’s of 21–6%) during humid summers and dry 
winters. 
  During the first exposure to significantly higher relative 
humidity, the rungs try to swell (increase in diameter, i.e. 
swelling perpendicular to grain). As they try to swell, the 
rungs are restrained along the axis of the chair leg. The chair 
legs behave like columns; they have very high strength in 
compression parallel to grain, just like the endgrain of the 
mortises in a trireme’s planking. As a result of the great 
relative  strength  difference  between  the  rungs  and  legs 
due to grain orientation, “weak” rungs are swelling against 
“strong” legs. The rung’s elastic limit can be exceeded if 
the increase in relative humidity is large enough. 
  If  there  are  large  swings  in  relative  humidity,  when 
the chair dries out during the following winter the rungs 
shrink to less than their original diameter and the chair 
is rickety. When the relative humidity increases again, the 
rungs cannot regain their original dimensions due to the 
crushed cell structure. Re‑gluing with an inelastic adhesive 
and/or putting a wedge in the gap between the rung and 
the leg during dry conditions only makes matters worse; 
the next moisture cycle will lead to further compression 
set.
  Table  26.2a   and  26.2b   include   compression   set 
calculations for different swings in relative humidity for 
various woods used in triremes.
  If a trireme were planked tightly and launched during 
the  dry  Aegean  summer,  it  could  hit  the  water  with  a 
moisture  content  as  low  as  8%.  In  service,   planking 
moisture contents at and below the waterline would reach 
fibre saturation at 28%. This ship would not leak the first 
time it was launched, but thereafter such a ship could have 
significant leakage problems due to compression set. Table 
26.2a and 26.2b indicate that each plank of 148 mm in 
width  could  acquire  3–4  mm  in  compression  set  (and 
occasionally more) under such extreme moisture cycling. 
Thus Theophrastus wrote as he did, that ‘planks that are 
too dry do not make a close joint...’
Compression set in mortise and tenon joints:
Compression   set  was  most  probably   also  a  problem 
in  mortise  and  tenon  joints  in  certain  critical  parts  of 
trireme  hulls.  Compression  set  could  create  temporary 
gaps between the tenon and the mortise greater even than 
John Coates’ estimated 1–2 mm slide between planks due 
to crushing of tenons.
  If we assume a very dry, 37 mm wide tenon (MC of 
8%) was placed tightly in a mortise near the waterline, it 
would try to swell when it got wet, but like the chair rung 
would be restrained by the endgrain of the mortise. When 
it dried out again, it would return to less than its original 
size because of compression set and later on would fail to 
fill the mortise fully upon subsequent swellings.
  Let’s return to the three zones with different moisture 
contents (actually a gradient) discussed earlier. As can be 
seen in Table 26.1, below the waterline and at the waterline, 
any tenon gaps should not be a problem since the tenons 
would  swell  and  reach  fibre  saturation  point  within  a 
matter of hours of re‑launch. Well above the waterline, 
even with the worst grain orientations, compression sets 
would be effectively zero, that is only 0.46 mm. 
  In  the  intermediate  wet/dry  zone,  each  T urkey  oak 
tenon 37 mm wide could swell and then retain between 
0.94 and 2.68 mm of compression set if it were eventually 
hauled  out  and  dried,  depending   on  initial  moisture 
content, number of rings per inch, whether the tenons’ 
grain orientation was aligned radially, tangentially or in 
some combination of these. If these tenons were created 
in dry summer months and given a ‘crush fit’ fore and aft, 
compression set would be still worse and initial stiffness 
for re‑launch could decrease. 
  How  much  and  how  fast  the  gaps  would  close  over 
time after re‑launch, as the planks and tenons absorbed 
seawater, would vary depending on their exact strength, 
grain orientation, proximity to the waterline, how quickly 
it  rained,  etc.  With  a  wider  tenon,  i.e.  like  the  tenons 
found  in  parts  of  the  Kyrenia  and  Marsala  shipwrecks, 
the compression set figures are much worse, as much as 
3–5 mm in each tenon. See again Fig. 26.3.
  The  values  in  Table  26.2a  and  26.2b  show  possible 
unrestrained swelling in  Olympias’ tenons of as much as 
2.8  mm,  and  compression  set  prior  to  re‑launch  could 
be as much as 2.4 mm for a Live oak tenon in Douglas 
fir planking. But the designer of Olympias, John Coates, 
has calculated the maximum slippage between planks due 
to  shear  to  be  between  1.0  and  1.8  mm.  In  short,  the 
gaps caused by compression set could be in excess of the 
possible sliding between planks. The fore and aft faces of 
the tenons would then offer no resistance to initial sliding. 
No wonder Olympias has hogged.
  Even  worse,  Coates  has  calculated  Olympias’s  neutral 
axis to be 1.2 m above the underside of the keel (about 10 
cm above the load waterline) at the locations of maximum 
shear between planks. The wet/dry zone begins just above 
this height, so any compression set in this area would lead 
to lower shear resistance in the hull just where it is most 
needed.
  We  can  now  hypothesize  with  some  confidence  that 
for  either  contemporary  or  ancient  triremes,  a  drive  fit 
oak  tenon  in  Mediterranean  fir  planking  would  swell 
and ‘crush itself’  in certain areas of the hull when it got 
wet. Unless Classical shipwrights understood the nuances 
of wood’s behaviour and compensated for it by allowing 
for swelling in critical parts of the hull, debilitating gaps 
would have been created by moisture cycling. 
  The  passage  from  Theophrastus  cited  above  clearly 
indicates compression set was recognized. Whether ancient 
shipwrights  understood  it  well  enough  to  compensate 
for it in tenons is likely to remain unknown. Given the 
distorted,  waterlogged  condition  of  the  wood  found  in 
===== PAGE 211 =====
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates198
ancient shipwrecks it would be most unlikely that gaps 
between tenons and mortises would be found in wrecks 
today. At best it may be possible for nautical archaeologists 
to determine when compression set had been a problem 
in a given vessel by studying the anatomical structure of 
the tenons in some detail.
  As illustrated, compression set would most likely appear 
as visible squashing, crushing or distortion of the wood’s 
microscopic anatomical structure, particularly as viewed 
in transverse section, and as mirror imaging between the 
faces of the tenon and the sides of the mortise. 
  Richard Steffy (1985, 81) has noted that in the Kyrenia 
wreck, tenons were generally cut 5 mm to 10 mm shorter 
than  the  sum  of  their  two  mortise   depths,   but  also 
notes that their widths matched well, and even the end 
shapes  of  the  tenons  somewhat  resembled  the  bottom 
configurations of their mortises. It is possible that some of 
these resemblances are due to crushing and compression 
set of the planking and tenons.
  Jay  Rosloff  of  the  Ma’agan  Michel  wreck  excavation 
reports in personal communication that the vessel’s oak 
tenons were very tight in the mortise, with no appreciable 
gaps. 
  Unfortunately, it is likely shrinkage and compression 
set gaps would have occurred near in the most sensitive 
area in a trireme hull. The behaviour of wooden planked 
ships is such that the greatest shear forces creating sliding 
between planks will occur at a distance of one quarter of 
the waterline length from either end of the waterline at 
the height of the neutral axis. For Olympias, this neutral 
axis occurs just above the waterline.
  The archaeological and mathematical evidence, while 
slim,   strongly   suggests   there   were  probably   serious 
compression set problems in the intermediate wet/dry area 
that coincides with locations of maximum shear along the 
neutral axis. Compression set gaps could then constitute 
the ‘Achilles heel’ of trireme construction. Only the first 
strake or so above waterline is likely to automatically swell 
fully (upon re‑launch) due to its reaching fibre saturation 
point. I suggest the second and third strake or so above 
the waterline could have tenons with significant gaps until 
they are exposed to big enough waves, heavy rain, or the 
ship is heeled over to thoroughly wet them.
  Launching  a  thoroughly  dried  trireme  and  taking  it 
directly  to  sea  within  24–48  hours  could  subject  it  to 
significant  shear  loads  at  a  time  in  the  moisture  cycle 
when the hull is least able to resist such loads. This is when 
hogging is most likely to occur, and when wood‑to‑wood 
or caulked watertight joints would likely be damaged by 
plank slippage, resulting in increased leakage. 
  Thus  in  the  first  few  days  after  re‑launch,  a  trireme 
could be less stiff. It is also possible the lack of stiffness 
due to inadequate contact between fore and aft faces of the 
tenon and mortise walls could be mitigated by a number 
of factors. 
  Without tenon to mortise contact, initial stiffness under 
load could still be substantial due to:
i)   caulking‑to‑plank friction (if caulking was used)
ii)   plank‑to‑plank friction
iii)   frictional forces on the corners, inboard and outboard 
faces of the tenons. A strake 15 m long (i.e. in the centre 
of the ship) with tenons every 0.92 m (as in Olympias) 
has about 163 tenons per seam. With so many joints 
in a given seam and their probable slight misalignment 
with  respect  to  each  other,  the  frictional  forces  alone 
could significantly ‘bind up’ adjacent planks
iv)   any resistance offered by attachment to internal framing 
members
v)   possible jamming of the end grain of the tenon against 
the bottom of the mortise as the planking swells and/or 
the tenon rotates in the slot
Since it would appear the absolute strength properties of 
wet tenons under compression perpendicular to grain are 
grossly inadequate for the loads incurred, it must be that 
friction with sides, rotation against the mortise bottom, 
and these other factors make a substantial difference.
  The author believes only testing on full size models in 
a proper laboratory would enable researchers to evaluate 
this assertion and the relative significance of these various 
factors.
Hogging
John Coates has written: 
‘Soon  after  the  ship  was  first  operated  at  sea  in  1987, 
the tenons joining together adjacent shell planks allowed 
some slip to occur between planks, and the hull hogged 
by about 6 cm over the length of the oar system. Owing 
to the way many of the tenons in Olympias were fitted 
during  building,  this  possibility  had  been  anticipated. 
Several plank seams had been marked with vertical lines 
drawn across them before the ship was moved from the 
building  berth.  By  the  end  of  the  first  sea  trials  these 
marks showed that the planks had slipped, relative to their 
neighbours, by about 1 mm. Since the planks are about 
15 cm wide, this slippage was sufficient to be the cause 
of the amount of hog observed, and shows that the hog 
was due to shear, not bending, in the hull.
  To try to prevent an increase in hogging during future 
service  the  tenons  in  Olympias  were  glued  in  place  by 
injecting a gap‑filling epoxy resin as far as was possible into 
the gaps between the fore and aft faces of the tenons and 
their mortises. Before that action was taken, the ship was 
slipped [i.e. cradled on blocks] so that her ends were held 
up to cause the hull to sag. The injection does appear to 
have helped in resisting further hogging, though no one 
can say for certain whether hogging would have increased 
if no glue had been injected.
  The hogging experienced in Olympias shows that the 
hulls of triremes were at the limit as regards their length 
relative  to  hull  depth.  The  tenons  preventing  the  side 
planks from sliding upon each other would have had to 
be fitted into their mortises very tightly in the fore‑and‑aft 
direction.  Indeed  it  is  reasonable  now  to  suppose  that 
in  antiquity  they  would  have  been  given  a  crush‑fit  to 
achieve  in  practice  the  simultaneous  bearing  required 
===== PAGE 212 =====
26. Trireme Life Span and Leakage 199
stiffly to resist sliding between planks. The taper found 
on the fore and the aft faces of tenons in some excavated 
wrecks could have been made to facilitate achieving such 
a crush‑fit when the upper plank was driven down over 
the tenons to close a seam. [But see notes on compression 
set, caulking, drawboring and other matters elsewhere in 
this paper.]
  The  shear  strength  of  the  sides  of  a  trireme  is  also 
affected by the presence of large oarports, and it now seems 
likely to me that the side planking in way of them between 
the lower and middle wales would have been thicker in 
order to house thicker tenons with greater bearing area 
to resist shear forces more stiffly.’
After the first period of trials in 1987, the hog in Olympias 
was about 6 cm measured by eye (Morrison and Coates 
1989, 69–73; Coates, Platis and Shaw 1990, 73). In 1992, 
the hog of the ship was measured to be 9 cm to starboard 
and 13 cm to port, both with and without the oarcrew 
on  board.  If  viewed  in  pure  profile,  the  starboard  high 
spot is about midway between the mast and the stern, on 
port the high spot is virtually opposite the mast. These 
measurements confirm the general visual impression that 
the ship is twisted (a condition which is common to most 
wooden  ships)  with  the  bow  lower  and  rotated  to  port 
relative to an arbitrary, level, midships plane. 
  The  hog  was  measured  on  a  very  calm  day  using  a 
steel measuring tape. The tape was lowered plumb from 
the outrigger to the water’s surface at five locations along 
the length of the outrigger. The tape length was adjusted 
until  the  peaks  and  troughs  of  the  very  slight  surface 
undulations were equidistant from the tape’s tip, then the 
measurement was recorded. Under these conditions the 
accuracy of this method is estimated to be plus or minus 
one centimetre.
  Operations   of  Olympias   in  England  in  1993  have 
clarified  the  factors  influencing  hog  still  further.  John 
Coates  observed   when  the  ship  was  pulled  from  the 
water  after  operating  on  the  Thames  River,  that  while 
the  keel  was  straight,  the  topwale,  outrigger  and  hull 
sides displayed some hog. Coates’ analysis (quoted from 
personal correspondence) follows:
I was not able to measure the hog in those parts of the 
hull but they were certainly hogged to a noticeable degree, 
as had been observed for some years previously. It is most 
unlikely that the keel would have straightened out as the 
ship was lifted out of the water while supported in her 
cradle,  moments  before  this  observation  was  made  at 
Tilbury.
  It follows that there has been some deformation in the 
transverse sections of the middle‑body of the hull by which 
the rise of floor has increased. If the keel has remained 
undeformed, this hogging must be confined to the sides 
of the hull. If the hull sides have risen relative to the keel, 
the ends of the transverse hull beams would then have to 
have bent upward so as to decrease their overall camber 
[‘camber’ is the convexity upward or curvature of a ship’s 
beams]. The ends of the beams would rise more than the 
pillars  since  the  pillars  are  secured  to  the  floors  nearer 
the keel and the beams would likely be flexible enough 
to flatten under some tension in the pillars sufficiently to 
keep the pillars attached top and bottom. 
  Whether upon building the beams were to any extent 
bent to their required camber is not known, so the degree 
to which the beam pillars would now be in tension must 
be unknown too. Prior to haul out at Tilbury there had 
been no search to see if the pillars were separating from 
beams at their heads or from the stringers at their heels, 
and it was not possible to check for this at Tilbury. We have 
little idea of what forces might have developed to separate 
pillars from beams or stringers. The pillars would however 
be fairly inextensible, compared with the flexibility in the 
vertical direction of the ship’s sides in shear and of the 
keel in bending. Pillars are attached to the stringers and 
beams at their bottoms and tops with 74 mm‑long tenons 
locked in place with a spike. 
  To  put  some  numbers  into  the  question,  I  estimate 
that the beams would deflect, at the tops of the pillars, by 
about 0.240 mm per kg of tension in each pillar, relative 
to the height of the ends of the beams, and therefore to 
the sides of the hull. If that is right, then a deflection of 
60 mm would call for a tension of 250 kg in each pillar. 
The locking spikes would be deformed by such a load and 
some separation from the stringer and beams might be 
visible. 
  The keel and its associated planking nevertheless form a 
substantial longitudinal member on the middle‑line of the 
hull. This has appreciable flexural stiffness with an effective 
length of only about half that of the hull, owing to the 
long rising parts of the keel forward and aft. The transverse 
timbers,  following  ancient  practice,  are  laid  across  the 
shell in several tiers which are not directly connected to 
each other. In 
Olympias their flexural stiffness in resisting 
change of transverse shape of the hull, particularly at the 
curve of the bilge, may have been further reduced. They 
were cut out of straight lengths of straight‑grained iroko 
timber  [instead  of  curved  timbers  which  would  allow 
the grain to follow the curve of the hull] so that they are 
cross‑grained at the ends of each tier.
  The  shell  of  the  hull  sides  forms  much  the  deepest 
component   of  the  hull  structure.   It  is  therefore   the 
stiffest  in  resisting  the  vertical  shear  forces  which  arise 
from  the  longitudinal  bending  moments  acting  on  the 
hull. It seems likely that the keel, being a much shallower 
member, could bear the bending actions placed upon it by 
the deformation of the hull in an elastic and recoverable 
manner.  In  contrast,  the  inherently  stiffer  shell  of  the 
hull  in  deforming  under  the  shear  forces  could  only 
do so by slippage of the tenons, which would not have 
been  elastic  and  recoverable.   There  would  have  been 
considerable friction between tenons and the long sides 
of their mortises, tending to hold the hull sides in their 
sheared (hogged) shape.
  In this hogging deformation of the ship it is surprising 
that  the  keel  structure  should  apparently  be  so  stiff  in 
bending. It is however likely that it does bend upwards 
amidships   by  some  amount  when  the  ship  is  afloat, 
under  the  upward  pressure  of  water  on  the  bottom, 
thereby reducing the tension needed in the pillars to keep 
everything joined together.
===== PAGE 213 =====
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates200
Drawboring of the pegs in mortise-and-tenon 
joints
Drawboring  mortise‑and‑tenon  joints  is  the  practice  of 
drilling the peg holes in shouldered mortises and tenons 
at  slightly  offset  (c.  4  mm)  positions.  When  the  peg  is 
driven into place, the tenon is ‘pre‑tensioned’ so that any 
initial gap or slack is significantly reduced. Typically, the 
offset serves to draw a shouldered tenon more deeply into 
the mortise so that the tenon’s shoulder is drawn tightly 
against the shoulder of the mortise (see Fig. 26.6). 
  Robert ‘Ben’ Brungraber (1985) showed convincingly 
that,
‘...the  drawboring   technique  [is]  the  most  influential 
factor  in  determining  a  connection’s  service  load  level 
stiffness against applied axial loads and bending moment. 
Drawboring, or ‘preloading’ the peg, ensures that all the 
components  are  in  solid  bearing  before  any  loads  are 
applied to the connection. As a result there is no slack...’ 
He goes on to show the initial resistance of the joint to 
being pulled apart, i.e. in tension, is doubled. The initial 
resistance to collapse, i.e. under compression, is quadrupled 
with  proper  drawboring  technique.  Drawboring  in  the 
timber frames of houses, which is what Brungraber studied, 
has ‘very little’ effect on shear loads. Given the extra labour 
and limited effectiveness such a technique would involve 
for un‑shouldered mortise‑and‑tenon joints in planking, its 
use in this application in antiquity seems very unlikely. 
  In contrast, drawboring could have been very useful in 
strategic locations of a trireme’s internal members, such 
as  in  the  pillars  mentioned  above,  fore‑and‑aft  bracing 
of the beams upon which the zygians sit, in the rowing 
furniture, and other part of the ship where initial stiffness 
against axial loads and bending moments is valuable. It will 
certainly be worth exploring applications of drawboring 
in these locations in future trireme reconstructions.
  Detection of drawboring in ancient shipwrecks would 
likely  be  difficult.  The  telltale  signs  would  be  hard  to 
distinguish in degraded, distorted and waterlogged timbers 
containing  joinery  that  may  also  have  been  deformed 
during  in‑service  loading.  Evidence  could  include  1)  a 
measurable  offset  distance  between  the  holes  drilled  in 
the tenon and mortise, 2) greater compression set on the 
‘drawn’ side than those found on the ‘un‑drawn’ side of 
the pin, and 3) crushing or compression of the holes where 
drawboring generates the greatest loads.
  It remains to be seen if drawboring can be detected. The 
T rireme T rust USA circulated a description of the issue 
and  an  offer  of  assistance  to  the  shipwreck  archaeology 
community in the hope of creating an interest in looking 
for this and other evidence related to mortise‑and‑tenon 
performance.   The  information   we  have  gathered   in 
response  to  this  inquiry,  such  as  the  evidence  on  grain 
orientation  in  the  Marsala  wrecks  sent  by  Ms.  Honor 
Frost, is included in this report, with many thanks to the 
contributors. None of the evidence submitted to date has 
presented evidence related to drawboring.
Possible solutions available to Classical 
shipwrights
The  solutions  that  common  sense  suggests  were  most 
likely to present themselves to trireme builders relate to 
1)  tenon  grain  orientation,  and  2)  tenon  thickness  and 
spacing. The labour and material costs of increases in the 
latter far outweigh those of the former.
  For two substantive reasons, better triremes could be 
built using tenons cut in such a way that surfaces with 
radial orientations faced fore and aft. As mentioned earlier, 
this appears to have been done in the Marsala shipwreck, 
but evidence from other wrecks is lacking.
i)   Radial orientation would reduce swelling against the end 
grain of the mortise, and therefore compression set, in 
comparison  with  tenons  that  have  tangential  surfaces 
facing fore and aft. If the radial surfaces face fore and 
aft the maximum calculated compression set in a 37 mm 
T urkey oak tenon is 0.94 mm.
ii)   Ring porous species like oak have radial faces that are 
stronger  than  tangential  faces  because  the  alternating 
bands of dense latewood are stronger (Fig. 26.7, 26.8 
and 26.9) and prevent the large diameter, thin‑walled 
earlywood cells from being readily crushed. Therefore, 
a tenon with its radial planes facing fore and aft would 
Figure 26.6. Detail of the technique of drawboring pinned 
mortise-and-tenon joints, which is the practice of drilling the 
peg holes in shouldered mortises and tenons at slightly offset 
positions in order to pre-tension the joint by pulling the two 
parts more tightly together (Drawing: Paul Lipke).
===== PAGE 214 =====
26. Trireme Life Span and Leakage 201
Figure 26.7. Planes of wood: T=Tangential, R=Radial, 
X=cross-section or transverse (Photo: Wilfred Cote). 
Figure 26.9. Photomicrographs of red oak, showing how dramatically different its structure displays, depending on orientation 
(Photo: Bruce Hoadley and Wilfred Cote).
Figure 26.8. Ring porous species like oak have radial (R) 
faces that are stronger than tangential faces (T) because the 
alternating bands of dense latewood prevent the large early 
wood pores from getting crushed (Photo: Wilfred Cote).
===== PAGE 215 =====
Paul Lipke, with contributions by John Coates202
be stronger than one with tangential surfaces facing fore 
and aft. 
Given this, crush fitting of radially‑oriented plank tenons 
might prove very helpful in stiffening a hull with much 
less risk of compression set if this were done near locations 
of maximum shear.
  It is possible to produce tenons with either tangential 
or radial orientations from boards riven from a log (or cut 
from logs by quarter sawing). See Fig. 26.4. Thick wedges 
produced  from  large‑diameter  trees  can  be  sawn,  axed, 
or split again to produce radially oriented tenons. Slash‑
sawn timbers can have radial grain exposed on fore and 
aft surfaces of tenons almost regardless of the tree size. 
  As the author can personally attest, riving green timber 
(especially oak) can be faster and less effort than ripping 
long planks out of a log, even with a two‑man hand saw. 
Riving can waste a lot of timber, but since tenons are small, 
this was less likely to be a factor. While wood scraps from 
other applications could be cut up to make tenons, the need 
for tens of thousands of tenons per hull would certainly 
necessitate processing timber specifically for that purpose. 
  Finally, in considering possible improvements to any 
trireme reconstruction to follow Olympias, Coates (1996, 
10) concludes, ‘tenons [in the way of the oarports] could 
sensibly have been 20 mm thick, not 12, and side planking 
60 mm [thick as opposed to only 40 mm]. Elsewhere in 
the hull planks and tenons could have been satisfactory 
if of the dimensions found in the Marsala ship...’
  This author concurs with one caveat, the Marsala tenons 
were 70 mm wide, nearly double those of Olympias, and 
so moisture cycling and compression set would likely have 
been a serious problem. This author suggests future efforts 
experiment with tenons that are thicker athwartships and 
more closely spaced, especially in areas of maximum plank 
shear, but not necessarily much wider longitudinally. A 
more modest increase in width, perhaps to 55 mm would 
result in maximum compression set in a T urkey oak tenon 
of ‘only’ about 1.4 mm.
Conclusion
As complex issues and new understandings in this paper 
have made clear, there is a great deal we do not yet know 
about  the  performance   and  interactions   of  the  most 
basic  structural  elements  of  a  trireme.  Further  research 
and experiments are needed. Both this author and John 
Coates believe an interdisciplinary study of mortise‑and‑
tenon dynamics, involving both wood scientists and naval 
architects,  holds  enormous  potential  for  increasing  our 
understanding of the practical limits faced by shipwrights 
and crews operating triremes and other mortise‑and‑tenon‑
built ships of antiquity. 
Bibliography
British   Standards   Institution   (1991)  British Standard 
Nomenclature of Commercial Timbers   Milton  Keynes, 
British Standards Institution.
Brungraber, R. L. (1985) Traditional Timber Joinery, A modern 
Analysis. Stanford, unpublished PhD dissertation.
Henderson, F . Y. (1977) A Handbook of Softwoods. London, 
C. Lockwood.
Casson, L. (1971) Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. 
Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Coates, J. S. (2001) ‘Planking tenons in Ancient Mediterranean 
ships  built  shell  first’ in Tzalas, H.  (ed.),  Tropis VI. 6th 
International Symposium on Ship Construction in Antiquity, 
Lamia, 28, 29, 30 August 1996. Athens, Hellenic Institute 
for the Preservation of Nautical T radition.
Coates, J. S., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J.T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Evans, J. H. (1983) Ship Structural Design Concepts: Second 
Cycle. Centreville, MD, Cornell Maritime Press.
Farmer, R. H. (1972) Handbook of Hardwoods. London, Her 
Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Frost. H. (1976) Lilybaeum (Marsala). Notizie degli scavi di 
antichità: Serie Ottava 30.
Hoadley, R. B. (1969) ‘Perpendicular to Grain Compression 
Set  Induced  by  Restrained  Swelling’, Wood Science  1.3, 
159–166
Hoadley, R. B. (1980) Understanding Wood. Newtown CT , 
Taunton Press Inc.
Hoadley,  R.  B. (1990) Identifying Wood .  Newtown  CT, 
Taunton Press Inc.
Jane, F . W . (1970) The Structure of Wood. London, A. & C. 
Black.
Meiggs, R. (1982) T rees and Timber in the Ancient Mediterranean 
World. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Mitchell, A. (1974) A Field Guide to the Trees of Britain and 
Northern Europe. London, Collins.
Morrison, J. S. and Coates, J. F . (1989) An Athenian Trireme 
Reconstructed. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F . and Rankov, N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme.  The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  Cambridge 
University Press.
Rival,  M.  (1991) La Charpenterie Navale Romaine .  Paris, 
Presses du CNRS.
Schweingruber, F . H. (1990) Anatomie europäischer Hölzer / 
Anatomy of European Woods. Bern, Stuttgart, Verlag Paul 
Haupt.
Shaw, J. T . (ed.) (1993) The Trireme Project. Oxford, Oxbow 
Books.
Steffy, J. R. (1985) ‘The Kyrenia Ship: An Interim Report on 
its  Hull  Construction’, American Journal of Archaeology  
89, 71–101.
Tsoumis, G.  and Voulgaridis, E.  (1980)  ‘Experimental Air 
Drying  of  Pine,  Fir  and  Beech  Lumber,’ Geotechnica  1 
(Jan–March).
USDA, Forest Products Laboratory (1955) Wood Handbook: 
Wood as an Engineering Material   Washington, DC  US 
Government Printing Office.
USDA, Forest Products Laboratory (1974) Wood Handbook: 
Wood as an Engineering Material .  Rev. ed.  Washington 
DC, US Government Printing Office.
USDA, Forest Products Laboratory (1987) Wood Handbook: 
Wood as an Engineering Material .  Rev. ed.  Washington 
DC, US Government Printing Office.
===== PAGE 216 =====
27.  T riremes and Shipworm
Introduction
In the Spring of 1995, the planking of Olympias was found 
to  be  damaged  by  shipworms,  which  had  riddled  the 
hull when the ship was left in the water with insufficient 
or degraded bottom paint (Fig. 27.1). Damage was bad 
enough that extensive re-planking was necessary to make 
the ship operational. There is a lesson here as to the purpose 
of hauling triremes ashore for ‘drying out’ in antiquity. 
Shipworm attack was by far and away the greatest threat to 
the viability of the trireme as a weapon. The threat remains 
so pervasive that even 2400 years later we are re-living the 
losses faced by the navy of Classical Athens.
Shipworm life cycles
Shipworms (T eredinidae) are molluscan, tiny clams with 
long soft bodies about 30 cm (one foot) in length when 
mature  (though  they  can  get  longer).  Imagine  a  worm 
with a bony head at one end, and siphons for drawing in 
or expelling water at the other. Adjacent to the siphons, 
shipworms have two pallets. Under distress (low salinity, 
adverse temperatures, etc.) T eredinidae pull in their siphons 
and plug the entrance hole with their pallets.
  As free-swimming, small (1 mm or so) larvae, shipworms 
find a tiny crack or crevasse in a piece of wood to which 
they  can  attach.  They  change  to  a  burrower,  eventually 
make a tiny hole, and then start eating and growing. Their 
tunnels can reach several meters in length, and are lined 
with a calcareous coating. This coating, and their plug-able 
entrance  hole  increase  their  ability  to  maintain  a  moist 
environment in which they can survive when wood they 
have  infested  is  removed  from  sea  water  (Spence  1993; 
T urner 1996).
Shipworm in triremes
This author suggests that of all the potential weaknesses 
of  the  trireme  as  an  expensive,  high-tech  ship,  e.g.  its 
dependence  on  very  high  quality  construction,  ease  of 
Paul Lipke
damage in battle, impacts of poor crew on performance, 
etc., none would have been as hard to control, or full of 
risk to those involved, as its liability to shipworm attack 
and  the  resultant  poor  speed  and  manoeuvrability  due 
to leakage.
  Shipworm  infestation  can  be  hard  to  detect.  Once 
started,  damage  can  progress  rapidly;  modern  wooden 
hulls  have  been  reduced  to  worthlessness   in  a  couple 
of  months.  The  damage  cannot  typically  be  patched  or 
caulked; damaged planking must be replaced. In the warm 
climate of the Aegean, infestation can occur rapidly in any 
season and at any time a hull is more or less stationary. All 
the larvae need to get attached is a tiny patch of uncoated 
planking or a crack in a seam below the waterline. 
  Modern marine coatings for wood are durable enough 
to prevent shipworm attack over relatively long periods of 
immersion (i.e. up to 6 months at a time in warm water) 
but traditional coatings, such as the tar and pitch available 
to ancient shipwrights, would have to be frequently re-
applied  to  be  effective.  Fast  galleys  could  not  afford,  as 
could merchant ships, the loss of speed that would come 
with a prophylactic hull sheathing of lead, as was found 
on the late 4th century BC Kyrenia shipwreck. 
Shipworm and mortise and tenon joints
Compared  to  other,  later  planking  methods,  it  would 
appear   mortise   and  tenon  built  hulls  would  present 
conditions under which shipworms could get established 
more easily and once established could survive various life 
threats for longer. Slight imperfections in the many plank 
surface penetrations (made by the pins of the tenons) could 
provide  easy  access  to  planking  at  the  most  vulnerable 
stage  in  a  shipworm’s  life  cycle,  when  they  are  seeking 
wood to which to attach, and making the transition from 
free-swimmers to burrowers. 
  In addition, though it would vary with wood moisture 
content and species, the open endgrain of the tenon pins 
could absorb more protective hull coating material than 
===== PAGE 217 =====
Paul Lipke204
any adjacent planking. In fact, with tenon pins made out 
of oak, Quercus sp., unless extra care was taken to apply 
enough coating material to the thousands of pins to truly 
seal them up, the large open pores of the open endgrain 
could provide shipworms with a nearly ideal entrance point.
  Furthermore, when a mortise-and-tenon-built ship is 
hauled out, the mortises create, in effect, little reservoirs 
that can supply water to dryer parts of the planking. Since 
established   Teredinidae  infestations   of  plank-on-frame 
wooden ships are known to survive haul-out periods of 
six weeks, it is reasonable to suggest the extra moisture 
held in reserve in the mortises of a trireme would likely 
extend that time span (see more on this topic below).
  In The Athenian Trireme, the authors write of ‘caulking 
of worm-holes’ and using ‘a coating of pitch’ to remedy 
‘the effects of teredon...provided that the hull is not too 
much  weakened’  (Morrison,  Coates  and  Rankov  2000, 
186). While  this  might  work  in  a  few  cases,  shipworm 
entrance holes are often quite small (1–3 mm) and hard to 
locate, particularly with the shipworm’s siphons withdrawn 
and pallets in place. It is also likely that any entrance hole 
conspicuous enough to locate would be connected to a 
tunnel large enough to significantly weaken a plank (which 
would therefore need replacement rather than repair). 
  In  Classical   literature,   to  this  author’s  knowledge, 
shipworms are not specifically mentioned in connection 
with ‘drying out,’ but they are clearly a common concern. 
In Aristophanes’ comedy Knights (1300–10) the ships are 
talking to each other and one trireme says, ‘...I would rather 
become an old maid here and be eaten by shipworm’ [than 
go to Carthage upon the request of Hyperbolus].
Other marine borers
Theophrastus  (5.4.4)  wrote  that  pine  is  more  liable  to 
shipworm attack than fir, and that while ‘the damage done 
by skolex and thrips is easy to cure, the damage done by 
teredon is impossible to repair’ (meaning teredo-damaged 
planks must be replaced entirely). Morrison reports the 
naval  inventories  frequently  list  ‘worm-eaten’  wooden 
gear. 
  In Morrison, Coates and Rankov (2000, 293–4), skolex 
and thrips are incorrectly described as types of shipworm. 
If this is true, the passage in Theophrastus makes no sense. 
‘Skolex’ and ‘thrips’ most probably refer to the crab-like 
gribble  of  the  genus  Limnoria,  which  does  not  burrow 
in  wood  but  feeds  more  slowly  on  the  wood’s  surface. 
Gribble and shipworm are often lumped together by non-
Figure 27.1. T eredo-damaged planking from Olympias. Note the damage in and around the planking mortises (Photo: Paul 
Lipke).
===== PAGE 218 =====
27. Triremes and Shipworm 205
specialists, but the former is far less destructive to ships, 
and far easier to detect and treat.
Ship worm and ‘drying out’
Morrison  and  Coates  summarized  the  Classical  literary 
evidence for ‘drying out’ hulls. The work focuses primarily 
on  the  hauling  and  ‘drying  out’  process  as  a  means  to 
remove  marine  growth,  renew  hull  coatings,  and  caulk 
planking  seams  to  reduce  leakage.  It  should  be  noted 
that  while  beaching   is  thought  to  be  quite  common 
(Blackman, 1968; 1982 note 114; Casson, 1971, 89–90; 
Foley  1982;  Coates  and  Shaw  1993,  87–90),  just  how 
this  was  accomplished  and  with  what  frequency  is  not 
certain. The careful analysis of Coates and Shaw (1993; 
see also Coates, above pp. 134–41) can be contrasted with 
the  completely  unrealistic  proposals  of  Steinmayer  and 
Macintosh T urfa (1996, 108), in which the authors write 
quite unrealistically, ‘the crew would begin to pull and also 
to run. When the ship touched the shore, the momentum 
would help substantially to beach it.’ 
  It is hard for anyone not intimately involved in the care 
of wooden ships to truly grasp how critical maintenance 
like beaching is to the life span of the vessel. Far more 
sensitive than buildings, under certain conditions a month 
or two of sloppy attention to detail in a wooden ship can 
prove disastrous. From more than 15 years as a professional 
maritime preservationist, the author can attest that some of 
the best-managed historic ship projects around the world 
re-discover this fact with dismaying frequency. 
  Morrison and Coates rightly avoid putting much value 
on the common misconception that the purpose of hauling 
a trireme out of the water was to make the ship lighter by 
reducing the moisture content of the hull. Any reduction 
in moisture content in planking below the waterline during 
hauling and ‘airing out,’ would be undone within a day 
or so of re-launching. 
  This  is  true  even  if  a  hull  coating  of  tar  and/or  wax 
(Morrison,  Coates  and  Rankov  2000,  187)  was  heated 
and  applied  while  still  hot  to  a  clean,  thoroughly  dry 
hull. Such an application could penetrate the surface and 
provide a thin, marine growth and water-resistant layer, 
but submerged planking would still reach fibre saturation 
point in a matter of hours or, at most, two days. The true 
benefits of hauling out are as a means of reducing the rate 
and extent of shipworm infestation by killing off larvae in 
the first few hours that they attempt to enter the wood. 
  How  long  would  a  trireme  have  to  be  out  of  the 
water  to  kill  off  T eredinidae?  The  answer  depends  on 
hull temperature, exposure to direct sunlight, the species 
of  Teredinidae  involved  and  the  age  or  extent  of  the 
infestation.
  If  an  un-infested  trireme  could  be  hauled  every  few 
days, (i.e. if it was operating in peace-time from a strong 
naval base with shipsheds) regular, frequent haul-outs and 
coating touch-ups would probably kill off any shipworms 
that were just getting attached/established. If the period 
between  haul-outs  lengthened  to  a  couple  of  weeks  or 
more,  then  haul-outs  would  have  to  last  longer  and/or 
involve more exposure to high temperatures, direct sun 
on  the  planking,  etc.  to  be  an  effective  defence  against 
shipworm.
  Similarly, if slightly infested planking was hauled up 
on a hot summer beach with full exposure to the sun and 
any marine growth was scraped off, a few days’ exposure 
could effectively kill off any lightly established shipworm. 
By contrast, a long established colony might last weeks 
under these conditions and thrive when re-immersed.
  If more moderate temperatures were involved and/or if 
the planking was shaded from the direct sun (
i.e. storage 
in a ship shed or the infestation was in strakes below the 
turn of the bilge, shaded by the topsides) the colony could 
survive longer still, and would thrive again when the hull 
was returned to the water. 
  The different Mediterranean shipworm genera of T eredo, 
Bankia, Lyrodus, etc. would vary widely in how long they 
could survive in a given set of haul-out conditions. Those 
like  the  Lyrodus  with  strong,  thick  pallets  which  could 
effectively seal off their tunnel opening, would presumably 
last  far  longer  than  those  with  weak  pallets.  Imagine  a 
well established colony of Lyrodus in a vessel hauled out 
in the cool, wet fall or spring of Greece; a month or more 
on the beach would likely not kill off the infestation. Re-
immersion would end the hibernation and give the colony 
the opportunity to thrive. 
  One  good  example   will  suffice   to  underscore   the 
importance  of  shipworm  and  its  devastating  effects.  In 
Thucydides (7.12.3), Nicias wrote from Syracuse after a 
year in which his fleet of ‘fast’ triremes had been at the 
moorings,
‘Our fleet was originally in first-class condition, the ships 
dry  and  the  crews  unimpaired,  but  now  the  ships  are 
leaky...It is not possible to beach the ships and dry them 
out because the enemy fleet ... keeps us constantly on the 
look-out for an attack’
What  would  make  the  ships  leaky  as  they  sat  at  their 
moorings? What are the possibilities? 
•	 In  hot,  dry  weather  in  calm  water,  planking  seams 
immediately above the waterline could dry out and open 
up. Such seams are easily ‘choked’ with cloth, fibre, any 
sort of putty etc. to reduce leakage, and in any case daily 
wash-downs  with  buckets  of  sea  water  would  prevent 
this problem from occurring in the first place. 
•	 Fibrous caulking materials, if they were used in triremes, 
would not deteriorate significantly under such passive 
conditions. 
•	 Seam-filling  compounds  of  pitch  and/or  wax  would 
hold  up  well  in  stationary  ships,  and  leaks  from  lost 
seam compounds are rarely extensive enough to warrant 
Nicias’ complaints. In any case seams could be re-filled 
while the ship was still afloat in shallow water or under 
a careening lasting only a few hours. (N.B. such seam 
touch-ups would probably have little effect on established 
shipworms).
===== PAGE 219 =====
Paul Lipke206
This author believes the problem lay with shipworm. The 
long trip from Corcyra to Sicily would create, even in the 
best-maintained hull seams, plenty of crevasses in which 
T eredinidae could get established. Static storage in warm 
water is ideal for shipworm. Nicias’ fleet at Sicily offered 
exactly this. 
  T unneling along the length of the planking, shipworms 
would tend to detour around the denser woods used for 
tenons but would ‘happily’ consume the softer fir or pine 
planking around it. Inevitably, tunnel edges would intersect 
mortises, which would likely increase the numbers of leaks 
both at the mortise and along adjacent plank seams. These 
would be impossible to caulk, and the damage could not be 
repaired without re-planking the infested parts of the hull.
  As made clear above, short haul-outs would likely be 
of no value in eliminating such entrenched shipworms. In 
fact, with established colonies, brief haul-outs or careening 
to scrape off marine growth (in order to maintain battle-
ready condition) could actually accelerate the consumption 
of  planking  by  increasing  water  flow  past  the  siphons 
(T urner 1995).
Future experiments
Dr.  Ruth  Turner,  the  leading  world  authority  on  the 
T eredinidae, has said to this author, ‘There is so much we 
don’t know [about T eredinidae]. There is so much [to learn] 
about how rapidly they could destroy ancient ships or how 
well they could survive the ships being hauled out; this is 
an area which cries out for some simple experimentation 
(R. D. T urner, pers. comm. (8/27/95)).’
 T eredinidae  were,  in  all  probability,  the  most  critical 
weakness in the viability of the trireme as an instrument of 
political and economic hegemony. The constraints imposed 
on triremes by the laws of physics have not changed since 
Classical  times,  and  this  fact  enabled  Olympias  to  be 
reconstructed, built and tested. In the same way, the life 
cycles, behaviours and problems generated by T eredinidae 
have not changed in the intervening millennium. 
  Therefore, to understand triremes day-to-day operations 
and the challenges faced by Classical shipwrights, scholars 
might want to focus on conducting experiments on this 
topic using very economical hull and planking test-sections 
before any funds are spent on any future reconstruction 
including:
i)   Out-of-water  survival  rates  of  T eredinidae  in  infested 
mortise-and-tenon-joined   planking   under   different 
weather conditions and periods of time.
ii)   Ability  of  T eredinidae  to  penetrate  (or  find  voids  in) 
pine tar/wax/pitch hull coatings of mortise-and-tenon 
planking.
iii)   The influence of frequent haul-out, with and without 
touch-up of hull coatings, on both T eredinidae infestation 
rates, and on rate of destruction of planking after it is 
infested.
It  is  hoped  such  experiments  will  be  carried  out  in  the 
near future, but not directly on Olympias or any of her 
successors. 
Acknowlegdement
This  paper  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the 
cooperation   and  encouragement   of  the  leading  world 
authority on T eredinidae, Dr Ruth D. T urner of Harvard 
University Museum of Comparative Zoology.
Bibliography
Blackman,  D.  J.  (1968)  The  ship-sheds.  In  Morrison  and 
Williams (1968), 181–192.
Blackman, D. J. (1982) Ancient Harbors in the Mediterranean. 
International Journal of Nautical Archaeology  11, 79–104 
and 185–211.
Bletchly,  J.  D.  (1967) Insect and Marine Borer Damage 
to Timber and Woodwork .  Forest   Products   Research 
Laboratory. London, HMSO.
Casson, L. (1971) Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. 
Princeton NJ, Princeton University Press.
Coates,  J.  F .  (1997)  Some  comments   on  the  article  on 
shipworm  in  (and  beaching  of)  ancient  Mediterranean 
warships in International Journal of Nautical Archaeology  
25.2,   104–121.   International Journal of Nautical 
Archaeology, 26.1, 82–83.
Coates, J. F . and Morrison, J. S. (1987) Authenticity in the 
replica Athenian trieres. Antiquity 61, 87–90.
Foley,  V.  et al.   (1982)  A  trireme  displacement   estimate. 
International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 11,  305–
318.
Hoadley, R. B. (1980) Understanding Wood. Newtown, CT , 
Taunton Press Inc.
Morrison, J. S and Williams, R. T . (1968) Greek Oared Ships 
900–322 B.C. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F ., and Rankov, N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  Cambridge 
University Press.
Shaw, J. T . (ed) (1993) The Trireme Project. Oxford, Oxbow 
Books.
Spence, L. (1993) Shipworms and gribbles: the wooden boat 
eaters. Wooden Boat 111 (March/April).
Steinmayer Jr., A. G. and MacIntosh T urfa, J. (1996) Effects 
of shipworm on the performance of ancient Mediterranean 
warships.  International Journal of Nautical Archaeology  
25.2, 104–121.
T urner, R. D. (1966) A Survey and Illustrated Catalogue of the 
T eredinidae. Cambridge  MA,  Museum of  Comparative 
Zoology, Harvard University.
USDA, Forest Products Laboratory (1987) Wood Handbook: 
Wood as an Engineering Material .  Revised   edition. 
Washington DC, US Government Printing Office.
===== PAGE 220 =====
28. Cordone, contracordone and hypozomata
1. Cordone and contracordone
Cordone were structural reinforcements applied to the hulls 
of Genoese galleys of c. AD 1600. A reason for drawing 
attention to them, apart from the inherent interest of 
the subject, is that it may plausibly be argued that they 
were developed from the hypozomata of ancient Greek 
warships such as the trieres. These early 17th century 
devices are briefly described by Joseph Furttenbach in his 
Architectura Navalis of 1629 (Furttenbach 1629, 53-4). 
His description is elucidated by a schematic illustration of 
the cross-section of a Genoese galley which is reproduced 
here as Fig. 28.1. 
 The cordone, sometimes called centa (Furttenbach 1629, 
30), are wooden beams mounted outboard on each side of 
the hull along its entire length. They are of approximately 
semicircular cross-section, have a thickness of 5⁄12 palmo  
and a width of ⅔ palmo (1 palmo = 244 mm or 0.8 ft). 
The distance below the gunwale is a constant 1½ palmi. 
Similar timbers are mounted on the inside of the frames, 
at the positions marked m in the diagram. These beams, 
of rectangular cross-section, are called contracordone.
 After presenting his description of both the cordone and 
the contracordone, Furttenbach (1629, 54) briefly explains 
the purpose of this construction in the following terms:
‘both aforementioned cordone cause the ribs of the galley 
to be gripped together and to be fixed in such manner 
that none of them can bend, much less have sufficient 
play to alter its position.’
At first sight, it might seem that it was the bending of the 
cordone around the hull that caused the planking to be 
pressed against the frames, especially in the middle, having 
the same overall effect as a cable laid under tension around 
the hull would have. However, calculation shows that the 
wooden cordone beam is far too flexible for this method 
to have a significant effect. The 46 m (152 ft) long beam, 
itself weighing about 3000 N (300 kgf or 660 lbs), when 
bent around the hull exerted a force of no more than 70 
N (7 kgf or 16 lbs), a negligible value.
André Wegener Sleeswyk
 But if bending the beam around the hull did not 
produce an appreciable effect, a viable alternative would 
have been to subject it to tension, just as a cable would 
have been. A reason for using a beam instead of a cable 
would be that a wooden beam, when drying out or being 
wetted, would shrink or expand far less than a laid cable 
would do. In addition, setting up a tensile force in the 
beam, e.g. by means of wedges, may have been simpler 
than doing the same in a cable. 
 A quantitative estimate of the force which could have 
been exercised athwartships by the beam as it was pulled 
longitudinally at both ends around the hull can be obtained 
without difficulty. The cross-sectional area of the cordone is 
approximately 130 cm, and if half of the allowable stress 
of 5.6 MPa in spruce is taken as the working stress (Beer 
and Johnston 1992, 702), the force that may be applied 
to its ends will be 36 kN (8,100 lbs). Assuming that the 
shape of the hull around which the cordone is laid is a 
section of a circle, the force exercised athwartships can 
be calculated from the principal dimensions of the hull 
as 19 kN (4,300 lbs), a few tons, a value which seems of 
the right order of magnitude.
 It appears highly probable that the name 
cordone given 
to the bent wooden beam on the outside of the hull is 
historically significant, as the translation of this Italian 
word is ‘thick rope.’ The most straightforward explanation 
is that the appellation must be a relic of the tensioned 
cable which was presumably originally used instead of a 
bent wooden beam under tension. Of particular interest 
is the presence of the two contracordone. If they were no 
more than originally straight wooden beams which had 
been bent in the same manner as the cordone, they would 
merely have exerted a weak inward force on the frames in 
the middle of the ship, in the same direction as the planking 
was being pushed by the cordone. But if the contracordone 
were made to exert forces in the opposite direction, i.e. 
outwards, the frames and the planking would have been 
pushed together by opposing forces. Moreover, in that case 
bending of the frames could indeed have been avoided, as 
===== PAGE 221 =====
André Wegener Sleeswyk208
Furttenbach claims, because if these forces acting on the 
frames were of equal magnitude, they would have cancelled 
each other. 
 It cannot have been difficult to cause the pair of 
contracordone to exert outward-directed forces. If it may 
be assumed that the contracordone were bent in parallel to 
the cordone – as is most probable – application of forces of 
opposite sign but of the same magnitude as those applied 
to the ends of the cordone would have resulted in a force 
athwartships having the same magnitude as the opposing 
force exerted by the cordone. The transverse forces on the 
ends of the pair of contracordone would have balanced 
each other if these ends were made to support each other 
in the plane of symmetry of the hull. Furttenbach does 
not offer any indication of how the forces in the cordone 
and contracordone were set up. Mechanically, it would 
seem best if these forces were made to balance each other 
directly, but this does not exclude the alternative, viz. that 
the forces in the two were set up separately. 
2. Frapping the hull
Although it is clear from the foregoing that the cordone 
were part of a mechanical system for forcefully pressing 
together the shell and the frames of a Genoese galley in 
the middle of the hull, this does not tell us why this was 
done. The explanation must be sought in the dangerous 
mechanical loading conditions which may prevail in the 
middle of a ship, where the bending forces acting on the 
hull are at a maximum. The scale of that maximum depends 
mostly on the length of the hull and the state of the sea; 
it tends to be large in a long ship in a seaway. As a result 
of extreme conditions of this kind, the strakes may start 
to slide back and forth past each other in the seams as the 
ship passes through the waves. Such repeated movement 
would result in the loss of the caulking in the seams in a 
ship of the post-classical period, and in an ancient Greek 
or Roman ship in a gradual increase of the play of the 
tenons in their mortises in the planking and in working 
loose the tenon-and-dowel joints. If these effects caused 
heavy leakage, this would have represented only an initial 
stage leading to an even worse next stage, in which the 
coherence of the hull was threatened by working loose of 
the treenails which joined the frames to the planking. 
 This danger, which would eventually lead to the hull 
breaking up, would be greatly enhanced if the planking 
and the frames ceased to be in contact. It was in particular 
to counteract the danger of disintegration of the hull of 
a ship in a gale that measures were taken to prevent the 
separation of the planking and the frames. ‘Frapping,’ 
i.e. winding four or five turns of cable under tension 
vertically around the middle of a weakened hull as a 
temporary reinforcement was the commonly applied 
remedy (Falconer 1815, 158). The principal effect was, of 
course, to press the planking against the frames. According 
to Casson (1971, 91), the technique:
‘is known from at least the first century AD and lasted 
as long as the wooden sailing ship; the most celebrated 
example is when St. Paul’s vessel was struck by a gale and 
the sailors “used helps to undergird the ship”.’
Other less well-known but also less obscure references make 
perfectly clear how it was done. Apparently, the effect of 
the pre-stressed cordone and contracordone was similar to 
frapping the hull; they constituted a permanent means of 
pressing together the planking and the frames in the middle 
of the ship, in anticipation of conditions where this might 
be needed to ensure the structural integrity of the hull. In 
Figure 28.1. Furttenbach’s schematic cross-sectional diagram of a Genoese galley of c. AD 1600, showing both the cordone on 
the outside of the hull, and the location of the contracordone at m on the inside of the frames.
===== PAGE 222 =====
28. Cordone, Contracordone and hypozomata 209
a long and slender galley that necessity would manifest 
itself much sooner, presumably, than in a shorter and 
more heavily built merchantman. Moreover, the presence 
of outriggers may have rendered effectual frapping of the 
hull in a gale difficult, if not altogether impossible. This 
would have been a good reason for equipping sea-going 
galleys with devices which did so permanently.
3. Hypozomata
If cordone were originally cables instead of wooden beams, 
as appears most likely, they would not have been vertical, as 
in the provisional frapping of a ship in a gale, but horizontal 
above the waterline, just as the cordone were. These cables 
must have been identical to the hypozomata mentioned in 
a number of ancient Greek inscriptions and other sources, 
which were reviewed by Morrison and Williams (1968, 
294–8). They deduced from one such inscription ( IG 22 
1631 671) that a hypozoma ‘was long enough to pass round 
outside the hull of a 120 ft. trieres from end to end with 
something to spare’. They confirmed this finding by data 
on the oversized tesserakonteres of Ptolemy Philopator, from 
which it follows that the length of a hypozoma girdling 
a hull 280 cubits long was 600 cubits. Referring to this 
passage of Morrison and Williams, Casson (1971, 91) 
thought that their ‘comprehensive review of the evidence 
ends a controversy which has raged for over a century.’ 
 However, the fire of the controversy to which Casson 
referred was rekindled when Olympias  was designed. 
Morrison and Coates (1986, 197 = Morrison, Coates 
and Rankov 2000, 196), ignoring the earlier review by 
Morrison and Williams, stated that 
‘The position and rigging of hypozomata have been a 
particular mystery in triereis, but it is virtually certain 
that their purpose was to reduce bending stresses which 
would otherwise damage the hull. ...To protect the 
hull structure against breaking its back by hogging, the 
hypozomata should be stretched between points forward 
and aft high in the hull section where they would act like 
a hogging truss.’
Accordingly, the lightly constructed hull of Olympias 
was equipped with an internal hogging truss. But, as the 
author argues elsewhere in this volume (pp. 109–20), there 
is good reason for believing that the hull of the original 
Greek trireme was much more heavily built than that of 
Olympias, which in all probability obviated the necessity 
of having recourse to a hogging truss. 
 If the 
hypozoma really was a precursor of the cordone, 
the question must be asked whether or not it was applied 
in conjunction with a contracordone. As far as we know, 
the Genoese galley was the last type of ship to carry a 
permanent external reinforcement such as a cordone; it 
does not seem probable that at that time the contracordone 
was a recent improvement. It seems more likely that 
the latter was already used in antiquity. We are thus led 
to assume, with some confidence, that ancient Greek 
galleys were equipped with both hypozomata and a pair of 
contracordone. It does not seem warranted to extend this 
assumption to the much earlier Egyptian ships which are 
sometimes depicted as being girdled by hypozomata, such 
as the ships of Sahure of c. 2500 BC (Borchardt 1913). We 
do not know anything about their internal structure, but 
in general they were of a build different from the Greek 
vessels, as they commonly consisted of frameless thick 
shells built up of interconnected planks. Perhaps the Greeks 
discovered, when applying the Egyptian hypozoma, that 
contracordone were needed in their thin-shelled ships. 
 It may appear to be a problem that the planking of 
galleys, both ancient and modern, would have been 
more or less parallel to the gunwale. Consequently, the 
hypozomata or cordone could have pressed directly against 
one or two strakes only. However, in the Greek galleys in 
which the strakes were edge-joined by dowelled tenons, 
the force exerted by the hypozomata would have been 
transmitted to the adjacent strakes also. Obviously, the 
system would have been very effective in ships built in 
this manner.
 At first sight, it would seem that the situation would 
have been quite different in Renaissance galleys, in which 
the strakes were not edge-joined. But one must remember 
that these ships were caulked, which, besides rendering 
the hull watertight, has the important secondary effect of 
generating large compressive forces in the plane of the shell 
of planks. As a result, the strakes are interconnected up 
to the friction threshold produced by these forces (Culler 
1974, 93). Below that threshold, the planking may be 
considered as being effectively edge-joined. Presumably, 
the pressing upon the strakes by a hypozoma would have 
been quite effective in this case also, but obviously only 
up to the point where the seams lost their caulking.
4. Pre-stressing the hypozomata  
and the contracordone
How the necessary tension in the hypozomata and the large 
longitudinal compressive forces on the contracordone were 
generated are problems best considered together, because 
the resulting compressive forces must counterbalance one 
another. From the foregoing it may be concluded that the 
forces necessary to bend the cordone and contracordone beams 
were approximately equal and negligible in comparison to 
the longitudinal forces applied to these. As explained above, 
the desired balance of compressive forces on the shell and 
the frames results if the forces applied to the ends of the 
contracordone and to the ends of the hypozomata also work 
in opposite directions and are of equal magnitude. 
 Devices for maintaining the tension in 
hypozomata are 
mentioned in Greek literature and in inscriptions under 
the names of entonoi or tonoi, or even ‘tonoi of hypozomata’ 
(Morrison and Williams 1968, 296). There is no doubt that 
these tightening devices were located inside the hull of the 
ship, not on the outside, which implies that at least part of 
each hypozoma, or perhaps an extension of it, must have 
been led into the hull. Neither the contracordone, nor the 
===== PAGE 223 =====
André Wegener Sleeswyk210
method of pre-stressing them, appears to be mentioned in 
the ancient sources; it is possible that such references are 
hidden in hitherto obscure passages in the known literature.
 It is not entirely clear how hypozomata were fastened to 
the hull aft, where the gunwale and the stern both sweep up 
toward the aphlaston. In some ancient depictions of oared 
ships a powerful loop of plaited rope, called koryphaia, is 
shown passing vertically around the stern. It may have 
provided anchoring points on the outside of the hull for 
the hypozomata (Morrison and Williams 1968, 296; Casson 
1971, 91). Presumably, these would have allowed the 
hypozoma to deviate from the line parallel to the gunwale 
and to pass around the stern at a convenient angle. 
 Setting up simultaneously a tensile force in the 
hypozoma and a compressive force of the same magnitude 
in the contracordone involves an elementary mechanical 
principle which may well have been used by ancient Greek 
shipwrights: it requires the contracordone to support the 
hypozoma cable where it is guided sideways at a 90° angle. 
Several ways of achieving this are possible, but if we take 
into account that the hypozoma loop was somewhat longer 
than twice the length of the galley, it seems most probable 
that a length of half-loop of the hypozoma cable was drawn 
through a hole in the hull, as shown schematically in Fig. 
28.2a, and passed through a gap in the contracordone too. 
The ends of the latter should each have been fitted with a 
head rounded off so as to guide the cable over the quarter 
turn. The tensioning device, tonos or entonos – the word 
does not indicate on what principle it operated – should 
have been made to act on the middle of the half-loop inside 
the ship; the force it exerts should have been equal to at 
least twice the tension force in the cable. The mechanical 
system would have been completed by a transverse pillar 
or beam supporting the contracordone, or the head fitted to 
it, for taking up the force component athwartships exerted 
by the cable guided around the head on the contracordone.  
That support system would have been duplicated for the 
other end of the contracordone. If the two supporting pillars 
or beams were interconnected by a third beam to which the 
end of the tonos was fastened in the middle, as shown in 
Fig. 28.2b, the three beams would have formed a yoke to 
which the large transverse forces exerted by the tonos were 
confined; only the forces aligned alongships would have 
been transmitted to the hypozoma and the contracordone.
 The purpose of the hypozomata, and the run of the 
cable as explained above, appear to fit surprisingly well 
Apollonius Rhodius’ description ( Argonautica 1.367–9) 
of the fitting out of the Argo prior to launching:
‘they girded it by a well-thought out plan, putting a tension 
on each side with a well-twisted rope from within, so that 
the planks should fit well with the dowels and withstand 
the opposing force of the sea’ . 
Figure 28.2. a: Schematic diagram of the run of the hypozoma around the hull of a trireme, with bights for two tonoi. The 
scheme gives one of the many obvious possibilities; b:  hypothetical reconstruction of the tonos, which fits both the ‘well-twisted 
rope’ mentioned in the literature and mechanical exigencies. The means of closing the hole through which the hypozoma bight 
enters is not shown.
===== PAGE 224 =====
28. Cordone, Contracordone and hypozomata 211
As Morrison and Williams (1968, 297) comment, ‘The 
“well-twisted rope from within” sounds just like the tonos 
or entonos.’ One may add that the passage actually specifies 
its working principle, and that ‘putting a tension on each 
side’ may be readily be understood by referring to Fig 
28.2b, where it is shown how the tension generated by the 
tonos is transmitted to both ends of the hypozoma. In the 
interpretation illustrated, the ‘well-twisted rope’ is taken 
as referring to an auxiliary rope led through an aperture 
in the middle of the wooden yoke.
 That some sort of yokes were, in fact, carried by Greek 
warships is suggested by a curious passage in Thucydides 
(1.29.3) to which Morrison and Williams (1968, 295) 
refer: ‘When in 435 the Corcyraeans were threatened by 
a Corinthian fleet they “yoked [ zeuxantes] their old ships 
to make them seaworthy.” This practice is probably that 
of fitting hypozomata to ships which are not on the active 
list.’ To this may be added that, at least according to the 
reconstruction presented here, fitting the hypozomata  
implied fitting yokes as well. 
 The magnitude of the allowable tension in the 
hypozomata may be estimated as follows. Morrison and 
Williams established that these consisted of ‘eight-finger’ 
rope, i.e. rope with a circumference of 160 mm. The 
average fracture force of hempen rope of three pouces 
(81.2 mm) was determined by Duhamel du Monceau 
(1783, 385) as 4,500 livres, 21.8 kN (2,200 kgf or 4,900 
lbs). The fracture force of the eight-finger hypozoma may 
then be estimated at 84.0 kN (8,600 kgf or 19,000 lbs). 
Assuming, as is customary, that the allowable force would 
be 1⁄9 of the breaking strength of the rope, one would 
obtain 9.3 kN (950 kgf or 2,100 lbs). Normally, two 
hypozomata were used, but under certain circumstances 
there were four. The total tensile forces to which they 
would have been subjected would have been 18.6 or 37.2 
kN. The closeness of the agreement of latter value to the 
36 kN for the allowable force in the cordone of a Genoese 
galley is surely fortuitous, but that these forces were of 
comparable magnitude does indicate that they served the 
same purpose, and it confirms the idea that cordone were 
derived from the hypozomata used in antiquity.
 So far, we have neglected friction, but leading ropes 
at an angle of approximately 90° over fixed heads must 
have caused a substantial amount of frictional loss of the 
forces exerted by the tensioning devices on the ends of the 
hypozoma girding the hull. The maximum loss is a fraction 
of the original force; estimating the value of the friction 
coefficient at between 0.1 and 0.25, it would have been 
about one quarter to one half of the applied tension. 
 However, while the ship was on the slipway, a stratagem, 
which would have suggested itself readily to anyone 
routinely handling ropes under tension, could have been 
employed to increase the tension in the hypozoma on the 
outside of the hull. It consists of ‘helping’ the tonos while 
it was being tensioned, by temporarily applying extra 
tensile forces to the hypozoma near to  the point where it 
was led into the hull. The extra tension, produced by two 
crews of men pulling in opposite directions tangential to 
the hull, would have been transmitted by stoppers applied 
temporarily to the hypozoma (Fig. 28.3). The tonos would 
then have taken up the extra elongation of the hypozoma, 
such that when the men ceased pulling, the extra tensile 
force would have been locked in by friction.
 Provided that the extra tensile force was large enough, 
a reversal of the ratio between the force exerted by the 
tonoi and the force transmitted to the hypozoma on the 
outside of the hull could have been achieved. As a result, 
a substantial tensioning force would have been locked in 
and added to the force in the part of the hypozoma outside 
the hull. Consequently, the total force would have been 
much larger than that which could have been produced 
by the tonos alone. 
 A procedure of this kind for bringing additional tension 
to bear on the hypozoma would explain the otherwise 
cryptic text of an Athenian inscription (IG 12 73, cited by 
Morrison and Williams 1968, 305) from the beginning 
of the Peloponnesian war. It prescribes that a minimum 
number of fifty men is needed to fit a hypozoma around 
the hull of a trireme. These men would have constituted 
two crews of twenty-five men, each of which pulled 
on one of the two stoppers temporarily fastened to the 
hypozoma, as explained above. A crew of 25 men would 
Figure 28.3. Diagram of the arrangement of the stoppers attached to the hypozoma when these are mounted. While the tonos 
inside the hull exerts a force on the bight in the hypozoma, two crews of men pull on the stoppers. When the men ceased pulling, 
a large extra force upon the hypozoma would have been locked in by friction.
===== PAGE 225 =====
André Wegener Sleeswyk212
have exerted a force of about 3 kN (about 300 kgf or 660 
lbs), each man being able, on the average, to pull with a 
force of about 120 N. The latter value is not more than 
that established by 18th-century French engineers, who 
determined it as between 24 and 27 livres, as reported by 
Belidor (1782, 43–45). The minimum value of the friction 
coefficient deduced from the values of the various forces 
discussed above is 0.16, which is in agreement with our 
earlier estimate.
5. Conclusions
The conclusions from the foregoing discussion may be 
summarised as follows:
1.  The cordone on the early 17th century Genoese galleys 
described by Furttenbach in 1629 were timbers under 
mechanical tension. They were mounted parallel to 
the gunwale and pressed the planking and the frames 
together.
2.  Fitting the cordone was a preventive measure to protect 
the ship if she was hit by a gale: it provided a permanent 
means of frapping the hull.
3.  Bending of the frames by the force exerted by the 
cordone was prevented by a timber under compression, 
the contracordone, mounted on the inside of the frames. 
It exerted an outward force balancing the force exerted 
by the cordone,
4.  The term cordone indicates that originally the tensioned 
element on the outside of the hull was a heavy rope rather 
than a wooden beam, which must have been identical to 
the hypozoma of the oared ships of antiquity. Calculation 
shows that the allowable tension forces on the cordone 
and on the hypozomata were of the same magnitude.
5.  As in the Genoese galleys, the forces exerted on the frames 
by hypozomata in ancient Greek ships were probably 
balanced by means of contracordone.
6.  It is shown that a hypothetical but simple mechanical 
method of simultaneously pre-stressing the hypozomata 
and the contracordone in ancient oared ships accords 
with some otherwise obscure passages in the known 
descriptions of hypozomata and their manner of fitting.
7.  A number if men pulling on the hypozomata outside the 
hull while the tonoi were tensioned inside would have 
produced a substantial amount of additional tension 
which was permanently locked into the hypozomata by 
friction. 
Acknowledgment
The author is much indebted to Prof. F . J. A. M. Meijer 
for discussing the problems and ambiguities in the Greek 
texts upon which part of this work is based.
Bibliography
Beer, F . P . and Johnston, E. R. (1992) Mechanics of Materials. 
London, McGraw-Hill.
Belidor, B. F . de (1782) Architecture Hydraulique . Paris, 
Charles-Antoine Jombert.
Borchardt, L. (1913) Das Grabdenkmal des Konigs Sahu-re.  
Bd. II. Leipzig, J. C. Hinrichs.
Casson, L. (1971) Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. 
Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Culler, R. D. (1974) Skiffs and Schooners . Camden ME, 
International Marine.
Duhamel du Monceau, H. L. (1783) Encyclopédie Méthodique 
Marine . Paris., Panckoucke. Facs. ed. (1987) Nice, 
Editions Oméga.
Falconer, W . A. (1815) A New Universal Dictionary of the 
Marine, ed. Burney, W. London, J. Murray. Facs. ed. 
(1974), London, Macdonald and Jane’s.
Furttenbach, J. (1629) Architectura Navalis. Das ist: Von dem 
Schiff-Gebäw Auff dem Meer und Seekusten zugebrauchen . 
Ulm. Facs. ed. (c. 1980) Lindau, Antiqua-Verlag. 
Morrison, J. S. and Williams, R. T . (1968) Greek Oared Ships 
900–322 B.C. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Morrison, J. S. and Coates, J. F . (1986) The Athenian Trireme. 
The History and Reconstruction of an Ancient Greek Warship. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Morrison, J. S. and Coates, J. F ., and Rankov, N. B. (2000) 
The Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd ed., Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press.
===== PAGE 226 =====
Part 6
Recent Research
===== PAGE 227 =====
29.  Collision Damage in T riremes
Introduction
This study seeks to begin shedding some technical light on 
the area of trireme combat, by better understanding the 
engineering aspects of a deliberate collision. This broad 
objective has been separated into three specific aims;
i)  Analyse   the  damage  caused  at  different   speeds  and 
headings;
ii)  Analyse  the  amount  of  damage  required  to  disable  a 
trireme;
iii)  Consider how analysis of the previous two aims might 
influence trireme tactics.
T rireme structure
T riremes were designed to be as light as possible, thus the 
hull structure was a lightly stiffened shell which was “little 
thicker in relation to its curvature than a plastic bucket” 
(Morrison  et al. 2000,  210).  This  study  has  considered 
the Olympias a representative trireme. The wooden shell 
is made up from planks butted up flush against each other 
(Fig. 29.1) and fastened together with a series of wooden 
tenons. Longitudinal stiffness is provided by the keel, top 
wale, three inboard stringers, and a length of taut rope, 
the hypozomata, between the bow and stern. T ransversely 
there are two frames, the top timber and the futtock, which 
hold the shape of the shell. The shell is also supported by a 
beam, spanning the width of the ship between top timbers, 
at the level of the middle wale. In should be noted that the 
lower thalamian beam provides no transverse support to 
the shell. The beam sits on top of the thalamian stringer, 
instead of being built into either of the frames at the level 
of the lower wale.
  The  structural  elements  at  the  waterline  are  the  top 
timber, futtock, lower wale, planks and the joining tenons 
(Fig. 29.2). The tenons are regularly spaced along the shell 
planking, allowing any load on a single plank to be spread 
to adjacent planks. For the trireme shell to fail, these tenons 
would have to shear before planks would bend and fail.
Robin Oldfield
Materials
Analysis  of  the  timbers  recovered  with  the  Athlit  Ram 
(Casson and Steffy 1991, 17) suggests that the wales and 
planking, the majority of the hull, were a red pine. The 
tenons, which held the planks and wales together, were 
oak  “possibly  of  the  live  oak  group”.  Other  historical 
evidence (Morrison et al. 2000, 179–181) suggests that 
fir was extensively used for much of the hull. In the case 
of the Olympias reconstruction, the selected materials were 
Douglas  Fir  for  planks  and  Greenheart  for  the  tenons, 
principally for their decay resistance.
  Unlike modern ship materials (i.e. steel), wood is not 
homogeneous  and  has  different  material  properties  in 
different directions: an orthotropic material. This is due 
to the cellular structure of wood, which has a grain (fibres) 
running through it in a single direction. The orientation of 
the wood to loads is therefore particularly important, with 
wood exhibiting its greatest strength longitudinally, along 
Figure 29.1. Mortice-and-tenon planking (Photo: John 
Coates)
===== PAGE 228 =====
29. Collision Damage in Triremes 215
the grain/fibres. In the radial and transverse directions, the 
timber can fail at loads several times smaller than when 
longitudinally loaded along the grain.
  The  moisture  content  of  the  wood  also  affects  the 
mechanical  properties.  As  the  wood  dries  out,  the  cells 
contract causing shrinkage. T ypically, mechanical properties 
data is given for green wood (freshly cut, so very moist) and 
wood which has been dried to a moisture content of 12%.
Tactics
Historians believe that triremes were designed to be as light 
and as fast as possible with a view to outmanoeuvring their 
opponents. A skilled crew in a fast and agile trireme would 
allow  the  commander  to  quickly  “strike  the  [opposing] 
vessel where it was most vulnerable, preferably in the sides 
or stern” (Casson and Steffy 1991, 78). This speed and 
manoeuvrability  was  also  the  trireme’s  principal  means 
of  defence,  facilitating   evasive  manoeuvring   to  dodge 
incoming opponents.
  The Athlit Ram, on which Olympias’ replica ram was 
based, had “a striking head that concentrated enormous 
forces  into  a  very  small  contact  area,  but  which  was 
prevented by a sufficiently widespread grid from penetrating 
too far into the hull” (Casson and Steffy 1991, 38). The 
commander  wanted  to  strike  with  only  sufficient  force 
to have “opened seams or broken planks over meters of 
length” (ibid.). A pointed ram, or a high energy collision, 
which fully penetrated the opponent’s hull could be just as 
damaging to the ramming vessel. The ships might remain 
ensnared, leaving the attacker impotent and susceptible 
to  boarding.  In  the  worst  case  the  ensnared  ram  could 
be ripped off, damaging the attacker and rendering them 
‘toothless’. Ultimately the objective of the attack was to 
inflict sufficient damage to disable the opposing triremes, 
by causing them to take on so much water that they were 
too heavy to row and difficult to steer. Accounts suggest 
that  at  the  end  of  an  engagement   damaged  triremes 
“continued to float and were towed away” (Morrison et 
al. 2000, 165) as opposed to completely sinking.
Collision modelling methods
There is a range of methods available to model structural 
damage from ship collisions. These are generally energy-
based and vary in complexity from basic one-dimensional 
models  to  three-dimensional   time-domain  simulations 
(Brown 2001).
Minorsky method
The simplest of the current methods is the 1D Minorsky 
method, which is based on conservation of momentum. 
This method assumes the following:
Figure 29.2. Isometric view of Olympias’ structure (Drawing: John Coates).
===== PAGE 229 =====
Robin Oldfield216
i)  The collision is completely inelastic;
ii)  The collision energy has little effect in the target ship’s 
longitudinal direction;
iii)  Rotations of the two ships are negligible.
Damage
Developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
the DAMAGE program is also based on conservation of 
linear  momentum,  as  well  as  angular  momentum  and 
energy. The program incrementally calculates the energy 
absorbed  in  hull  deformation  until  all  of  the  collision 
energy  is  used.  The  level  of  detail  within  this  program 
allows it to take into consideration the materials and the 
structural features of the rammed ship’s side structure.
Three degrees of freedom models
T wo  ‘three  degrees  of  freedom’  collision  models  are  the 
Hutchison model and the expressions derived by Pedersen 
and  Zhang.   The  Hutchison   model  expanded   on  the 
Minorsky method to consider surge, sway, yaw and hull 
membrane  resistance.  The  assumptions  which  apply  to 
this model are:
i)  The distribution of mass does not change after the initial 
collision;
ii)  Changes in headings and rotations are small and as such 
are neglected for parts of the model;
iii)  The ships coalesce after impact.
Pedersen and Zhang examined the impulses and motions 
in the locality of the impact point to obtain the collision 
energy,  which  is  calculated   uncoupled   from  internal 
mechanics. Their assumptions were:
i)  Rotations are small during the collision;
ii)  The  ratio  of  absorbed  plastic  deformation   energy  is 
constant throughout the collision for the longitudinal 
and transverse directions.
Method of analysis
For this study it was decided to split the analysis into two 
parts.  First,  to  calculate  the  minimum  energy  required 
to cause failure of a representative section of the trireme 
hull. Secondly, to calculate the kinetic collision energy for 
given ship speeds and headings. If the calculated collision 
energy is greater than, or equal to, the energy calculated 
to cause structural failure then it would be assumed to be 
a successful attack.
Hull failure
The  principal  problem  to  be  solved  in  this  study  was 
the means of calculating the failure of the trireme hull. 
The  structure  of  the  hull  shell  meant  that,  through  the 
connecting tenons, planks adjacent to the contact point 
provide  support  in  addition  to  the  transverse  framing. 
It  was  observed  that  a  ram  would  not  strike  the  whole 
surface of the hull in a single instance. Assuming a ram 
similar to but slightly smaller than the Athlit Ram (which 
came from a tetreres/quadrireme or penteres/quinquereme) 
and a flat calm, the lower wale would be contacted first. 
If sufficiently deflected, or in the case of failure, the ram 
would then strike the first plank of the four within its path; 
and so on until all kinetic energy has been absorbed. This 
is illustrated in Fig. 29.3.
  To simplify the problem it was desirable to consider 
each plank individually. As previously noted, the tenons 
connecting the plank to those adjacent would first need 
to shear. The stages of analysis are summarised below:
i)  Calculate  the  force  required  to  shear  all  tenons  along 
damage length;
ii)  Use this force to calculate the elastic deflection of the 
plank;
iii)  Check force is sufficient to produce the same deflection 
of the frames; if frame deflection is insufficient, calculate 
the force that achieves the required frame deflection;
iv)  Check the deflection and failure mode of the plank for 
Figure 29.3. Collision area (Drawing: John Coates/Robin Oldfield).
===== PAGE 230 =====
29. Collision Damage in Triremes 217
the greatest force determined at step 3, increasing the 
force if the plank has not failed or deflects a distance 
less than its thickness.
Assumptions
The  assumptions   applied   to  these  calculations   are  as 
follows:
Planks are fixed beams spanning 0.668 metres
The  length  of  0.668  m  is  the  equivalent  of  two  frame 
spacings  (Fig.  29.4),  and  was  selected  because  a  single 
frame  spacing  is  less  than  the  width  of  the  Athlit  Ram 
scaled down to fit a trireme. The ends of the beams are 
considered fixed because it is assumed unlikely that there 
would be longitudinal displacement of the frames at the 
ends of the beams. These frames’ connections with intact 
planks  away  from  the  contact  area  and  support  from 
longitudinal stringers should ensure that they retain their 
longitudinal positions.
Centrally located uniformly distributed load
The loading is uniformly distributed along the width of 
the ram, at the central point of the planks and wales. This 
is primarily because the elasto-plastic calculations are set 
up for this.
Effective width of planking is 60% of frame spacing
Referred to as the effective width of plating when dealing 
with modern steel ships’ frames, the same principles apply 
to  wooden  planking  and  frames  (assuming  the  joining 
between the two is satisfactory). When a frame is loaded it 
deflects, but part of the planking is deflected with it. This 
planking acts as if it is a flange on the frame, increasing 
the inertia of the frame and therefore the stiffness. Just 
how much of the planking behaves as a flange is unknown. 
Application of Faulkner’s method (Chalmers 1993) proves 
unfeasible, so a nominal percentage has been assumed.
Caulking between planks is neglected
It  has  been  assumed  that  any  caulking  material  would 
provide negligible resistance to any impact.
Collision energy is work done.
The  energy  required  to  cause  failing  of  the  shell  would 
be  the  sum  of  the  ramming   force  multiplied   by  the 
displacement caused on each component part.
Midship section’s structure is representative of 
the whole hull.
The  section  shown  in  Fig.  29.2  is  representative  of  the 
majority of the Olympias. It is only at the very extremities 
of the ship that there appear to be notable differences.
Timber is not green.
The  moisture  content  of  wood  affects  the  mechanical 
properties. The use of 12% moisture content data is in 
line with the design work of the Olympias.
Timber is free of significant defects.
Defects  in  the  wood  such  as  knots,  decay  and  grain 
irregularity  are  ignored.  The  mechanical  data  used  has 
come from test results with defect-free samples. It is also 
assumed that timbers used for trireme construction would 
have been checked for major flaws.
Material properties
Data on the material properties of the wood used were 
sourced  from  Forest  Product  Laboratory  of  the  United 
States  Department  of  Agriculture’s  Forest  Service.  This 
single source provided the greatest range of data for all 
the material types of interest. It should, however, be noted 
that  quoted  mechanical   properties   of  wood  can  vary 
significantly from source to source. The material properties 
used for the analysis are presented in Table 29.1. The origin 
of the tested timber is indicated. Varieties grown outside 
Figure 29.4. Elasto-plastic beam model.
===== PAGE 231 =====
Robin Oldfield218
the  Mediterranean  may  not  be  wholly  representative  of 
the indigenous trees.
Elasto-plastic beam calculations
The elasto-plastic properties of wood means that it will not 
fail when the elastic limit is reached. One suitable means 
of calculating the elasto-plastic behaviour for the planks 
and wales was put forward by Yankelevsky and Karinski 
(2000).  Their  model  has  a  symmetrically  loaded  beam 
split in half, with an infinitely small gap between the two 
half  lengths.  It  is  within  this  small  gap  that  the  plastic 
deformation occurs. With symmetrical loading conditions, 
only half the beam has to be analysed.
Frame calculations
The  frames  are  considered  as  having  fixed  ends,  where 
they are built into other structural elements (Fig. 29.2); 
for the top timber this is the end at the top wale, and for 
the futtock the end below the inner stringer. It is noted 
that  the  free  ends  of  these  frames  are  very  close  to  the 
ramming contact area, suggesting that they will offer little 
restraint against collisions.
Collision modelling
The  collision  modelling  utilises  the  Minorsky  method. 
This simplistic model is easier to apply as other methods 
require terms, such as added mass, which are unknown 
for the Olympias.
Assumptions
The following assumptions have been made;
Collisions occur in flat calms
There are no ship motions other than the forward velocities 
of the ships. The performance of triremes is dependant on 
weather and sea state (Morrison
 et al. 2000, 278), as crews 
experience difficulty drawing clean strokes with increased 
ship motions. As a starting point, this study models the 
optimum conditions.
If the x-axis relative speed <0 then there is no 
collision
It has been assumed that the target trireme outmanoeuvres 
the ramming trireme when the latter has insufficient speed 
in the x-axis to catch its target.
The absorption of kinetic energy is non-ideal
It is unknown just how much collision energy would be 
lost as heat and noise. It is assumed that the collision is 
90% efficient.
The energy of a 90° collision is representative 
 
of energy required at other angles
The  beam  calculations   used  to  determine   the  energy 
required to cause hull failure only consider a right-angle 
collision.  It  has  been  assumed  that  this  failure  value  is 
broadly acceptable to apply to collisions at other angles.
Collision calculations
The modelled collision uses a co-ordinate system relative 
to the forward heading of the target ship (Fig. 29.5). The 
longitudinal positions of the top timbers were recorded, 
and the tangent of the hull at the waterline was measured 
at  each  of  these  locations.  The  model  calculates  kinetic 
energy  absorbed  at  each  of  the  top  timber  locations, 
having considered the angle of the hull and the angle of 
the ramming attack, and the ramming speed.
  The deceleration experienced by the ramming ship has 
also been simply calculated, with a view to appreciating 
some  of  the  crew’s  human  factors.   The  deceleration 
calculation   assumes   that  only  the  component   of  the 
collision speed that is at right-angles to the hull is relevant; 
at acute angles the ramming ship would lose little forward 
speed as it rebounds off the target’s hull.
  
 
   
   
   
   
   
T able 29.1. Material properties.
Figure 29.5. Collision headings.
===== PAGE 232 =====
29. Collision Damage in Triremes 219
Findings
Hull failure
T enons
During the design of the Olympias the tenons had been 
sized,  and  the  material  selected,  to  withstand  “a  load 
per tenon of about 2 kN” (Morrison et al. 2000, 203). 
Comparative  calculations  with  Greenheart  showed  that 
the  shear  force  through  the  width  of  a  tenon  was  1.8 
kN; a good match. This, however, is only appropriate for 
loads applied longitudinally through the ship. The force 
calculated to shear a tenon through its thickness is much 
lower, at only 595 N. Across the damage length of 0.668 
m there are approximately seven tenons, roughly spaced 
0.092 m apart. Therefore, the ramming force required to 
shear all seven tenons would be 4,165 N.
Frames, planks and wales
T wo materials, Douglas Fir and Red Pine, were examined 
in the analysis of the frames, planks and lower wale. For 
both  materials  the  low  shear  force  produced  very  slight 
mid-span elastic deflections of the planks and wales (Table 
29.2 and Table 29.3). It is unsurprising that the forces to 
similarly deflect the frames were also very low; it should be 
remembered that both the top timber and the futtock frames 
end, unsupported, in the contact region, a clear weakness.
  For the Fir and Pine, the force required to shear the 
tenons was well in excess of the force required to deflect 
the  frames.  For  the  Douglas  Fir,  the  4,165  N  force  is 
insufficient to cause the lower wale to fail, or deflect it 
by its thickness. It was therefore necessary to increase to 
applied force to a level where the lower wale deflected at 
least  74  mm  or  completely  failed.  As  greater  force  was 
applied, the Douglas Fir did not deflect a sufficient distance 
before failing at 4,942 N. All elements of the Red Pine 
structure failed at the tenon shear force.
  The increased load bearing of the lower wale increases 
the  force  required  to  cause  failure  for  Douglas  Fir.  The 
lower wale primarily appears to serve, along with the other 
wales, as reinforcement for the oar ports. The locations 
of the wales in the 
Olympias had been influenced by the 
Lenormant  Relief,  but  the  lower  wale  has  been  placed 
nearer the waterline on the reconstruction (Morrison et 
al.  2000,  199).  Perhaps  the  trireme  represented  in  the 
Lenormant  Relief  would  have  been  more  vulnerable  to 
attack than the Olympias.
Collision modelling
A range of collision scenarios was analysed for both the 
Douglas Fir and Red Pine triremes. One historical source 
(Xenophon Anabasis 6.4.2) suggests that the average speed 
of a trireme was around 7.37 knots (Gardiner et al. 1995, 
57; cf. Shaw above, pp. 63–7), and it can be assumed that 
the typical combat speed would be higher than the average 
speed.  The  greatest  sprint  speed  attained  momentarily 
during  the  Olympias’  sea  trials  was  8.9  knots  (Morrison 
et al. 2000, 264). In discussion with the T rireme T rust’s 
Boris Rankov, it was suggested that a maximum speed for a 
modified (i.e. Mark IIb; see Part 2 of this volume, pp. 76–
91) trireme of similar construction to Olympias might have 
been nearer 9.75 knots with a full complement of fit and 
competent oarsmen. Based on this information the following 
collision  cases  detailed  in  Table  29.4  were  examined.
  Analysis  of  a  successful  collision  at  right-angles  to  a 
stationary hull indicated that the minimum ramming speed 












     
     
     
     
     
     
T able 29.2. Douglas Fir hull analysis results.










    
    
    
    
    
    
T able 29.3. Red Pine hull analysis results.
===== PAGE 233 =====
Robin Oldfield220
to cause failure was 0.37 knots for Douglas Fir and 0.32 
knots for Red Pine. Despite the ~15% extra energy required 
to cause failure in Douglas Fir trireme, there were negligible 
differences between any of the cases. All closing headings 
produced identical results, and every heading in every case 
succeeded. Without a doubt a closing attack is certain to 
have a greater chance of success, because the speed of the 
target only increases the magnitude of the collision speed.
  The pursuit results were of far greater interest. Case A, 
with the small 0.25 knot speed advantage, demonstrated 
that a pursuing attacker had insufficient speed to realistically 
inflict  damage  on  the  target.  Successful  headings  were 
found (Fig. 29.6, Fig. 29.7 and Fig. 29.8) along the parallel 
sides  of  the  target,  but  these  were  1°  arcs.  It  would  be 
remarkable for any helmsman to be so accurate. At the 
aft end, the angle of the hull reduces the deflection angle 




 
   
   
   
   
   
T able 29.4. Collision cases.
Figure 29.6. Case A: collision headings for Douglas Fir.
Figure 29.7. Case A: collision headings for Red Pine.
Figure 29.8. Case A: headings diagram for Douglas Fir.
===== PAGE 234 =====
29. Collision Damage in Triremes 221
between  the  ramming  heading  and  the  hull,  providing 
a cleaner strike which can transfer more energy into the 
target’s hull. Despite this advantage, the increased arcs of 
success were concentrated in such a small area that skilful 
targeting would still be required. The assumptions behind 
the structural model also break down at the extremes of 
the target; the keel would offer additional strength.
  As the relative speeds increased in Case B (Fig. 29.9, 
Fig. 29.10 and Fig. 29.11) and Case C (Fig. 29.12 and Fig. 
29.13), the pursuit arcs opened up. This was particularly 
evident at the aft end. Along the parallel sides, the arcs of 
success began to become increasingly viable. With a speed 
difference of 1.00 knot these pursuit arcs increased to ~15°, 
from ~7° at 0.50 knots. It thus appears that small speed 
improvements can greatly improve the attacker’s options.
  Case  D  was  envisioned   to  simulate   an  attack   of 
opportunity by a slower trireme against a faster opponent, 
which has unwittingly become a target. As expected, the 
slower  speed  of  the  ramming  trireme  prevents  it  from 
conducting a pursuit attack. The ramming trireme’s only 
option is to close head-on with its target, resulting in arcs 
of success identical to those seen in all other cases.
Deceleration
The simple deceleration analysis produced some significant 
decelerations.   It  was  observed   again   that  there   was 
negligible   difference   between   the  two  hull  materials. 
Unlike the collision headings calculations, it is the speed 
of  the  triremes,   not  simply   the  difference   in  speed, 
which determines the magnitude of deceleration. Case A  
Figure 29.9. Case B: collision headings for Douglas Fir. 
Figure 29.10. Case B: collision headings for Red Pine.
Figure 29.11. Case B: headings diagram for Douglas Fir.
===== PAGE 235 =====
Robin Oldfield222
(Fig.  29.14)  involves  a  ramming  trireme  at  8.25  knots 
and a speed difference of 0.25 knots. With Case C (Fig. 
29.15),  the  attacker  is  now  at  9.00  knots  and  there  is 
some  increase  in  the  maximum  calculated  deceleration. 
The deceleration limits for Case E (Fig. 29.16) increase 
further, but the speed difference is only 0.75 knots; the 
increased deceleration levels result from the greater speeds 
of both vessels.
Discussion
Hull Structure
The energy required to cause failure of the hull is so low 
that  it  was  initially  quite  surprising.  Historical  sources, 
however,  say  that  triremes  were  built  to  be  light,  fast 
and manoeuvrable; there is no suggestion that they were 
designed  to  resist  attacks  and  continue  the  fight.  The 
results of the study correlate strongly with this. The energy 
required to cause failure has been found to be low, but 
would be even less were it not for the lower wale.
  The  increased  thickness  of  the  lower  wale  helps  the 
hull to resist the ramming force, but its placement in the 
Olympias reconstruction may be a fortunate circumstance. 
Literature makes no mention of the lower wale functioning 
as a protective belt of wood around the trireme. Replacing 
the lower wale with a standard plank reduces the energy to 
cause failure by 31 J to 798 J. This small decrease would not 
greatly change the heading range for successful collisions. 
The wale would thus not offer any significant additional 
protection.
Figure 29.12. Case C: collision headings for Douglas Fir.
Figure 29.13. Case C: headings diagram for Douglas Fir.
Figure 29.14. Case A: deceleration for Douglas Fir.
===== PAGE 236 =====
29. Collision Damage in Triremes 223
  It had been assumed that “starting the seams” involved 
deflecting timbers further than their thickness, but before 
they completely failed. The Olympias’ lower wale was the 
first timber struck in modelled collisions. The lower wale 
would  have  to  be  overcome  before  other  timbers  were 
struck, but the required force was found to subsequently 
fail the thinner inboard planks. A structure with no lower 
wale still failed before a plank deflected further than its 
thickness, due to the tenon shear force.
Materials
The  results  with  the  more  ductile  Red  Pine  were  little 
different from Douglas Fir, despite the Pine planks failing 
at the lower tenon shear force. Both materials require so 
little energy to cause structural failure that the difference 
in collision speeds, which determines the kinetic energy 
in  the  collision,  is  negligible.  Once  again  the  historical 
evidence  (Morrison  2000,  180)  appears  to  support  this 
finding, as the Greeks only compared the two on the basis 
of weight and decay resistance.
Collision Headings
The results support the logical assumption that the greater 
the  speed  advantage  of  the  ramming  vessel,  the  more 
freedom for selecting a suitable collision heading. On the 
other hand, increased magnitudes of speed are undesirable 
as  they  potentially  result  in  greater  deceleration  being 
experienced  by  the  ramming  trireme  crew,  depending 
on  the  relative  collision  angle.  Decelerations  have  been 
simplistically calculated at magnitudes many times greater 
than gravity.
  Despite the maximal collision arcs for closing attacks 
such approaches would be highly undesirable. The results 
show that these attacks have higher collision speeds and 
therefore there is greater kinetic energy in the collision. 
It  should  be  remembered  that  the  energy  calculated  in 
this  analysis  has  been  the  minimum  to  cause  damage; 
increased  energy  would  result  in  the  ramming  trireme 
continuing  into  the  target  until  all  the  kinetic  energy 
had been absorbed. Increased kinetic energy would thus 
be a double-edged sword, easily damaging the target but 
resulting in the ramming trireme striking deeper into the 
opponent’s hull, an undesirable situation for a hit and run 
attacker. Furthermore, the deceleration would be greater 
Figure 29.15. Case C: deceleration for Douglas Fir.
Figure 29.16. Case E: deceleration for Douglas Fir.
===== PAGE 237 =====
Robin Oldfield224
for closing attacks, causing discomfort and possible injury 
to the crew of the ramming trireme.
  More preferable are pursuit attacks. Whilst the range 
of possible collision angles is often very limited, this is a 
function of the difference in ship speeds. The greater the 
speed advantage of the ramming ship over the target, the 
greater the range of collision angles. Targeting the fuller 
face  of  the  stern  improves  the  range  of  viable  pursuit 
headings. Inspection of the results suggests that it would 
probably  be  unrealistic  to  expect  a  trireme  commander 
to  successfully  attack  with  a  speed  advantage  less  than 
0.50  knots  (i.e.  less  than  Case  B).  In  such  an  instance, 
the arcs of success are typically less than 15°. To strike the 
target within such an arc, particularly in a fluid combat 
environment, would be tremendously challenging.
  Further  benefits  of  an  astern  attack  are  the  smaller 
decelerations  and  the  reduced  level  of  penetration,  as 
the relative speed difference is small. Even if there was a 
penetration, the forward speed of the target trireme would 
help the ramming trireme extract itself as it backed water 
(reversed). An attack on the stern also has further benefits 
in that the ramming vessel is well clear of the target’s ram, 
and can probably make a good escape well before the target 
can manoeuvre around (if it is still capable of moving).
Conclusions
The  key  findings   produced   by  the  analysis   can  be 
summarised as:
i)  The  trireme  structure   is  not  designed   to  withstand 
ramming attacks;
ii)  The lower wale can increase the force required to cause 
failure, but does not offer any significant protection;
iii)  The greater the attacker’s advantage in speed, the larger 
the arcs of successful collision headings;
iv)  The greater the speeds of the triremes, the greater the 
deceleration;
v)  There  are  negligible  differences  in  collision  headings 
between a trireme constructed of Douglas Fir and one 
of Red Pine;
vi)  Pursuit attacks require a speed advantage of at least 0.50 
knots.
Many of these findings are supported by logic and historical 
evidence: triremes are light with minimal structure and 
therefore vulnerable to collisions. Greater collision speeds 
result in greater kinetic energy, and a faster collision over a 
fixed distance experiences higher deceleration. The tactical 
considerations  drawn  from  the  findings  are  similar  to 
those implied by the historians (at least for the Classical 
period),  principally  that  attacks  on  the  stern  and  sides 
were preferred to head-on collisions. Attacks from astern 
require a speed advantage of at least 0.50 knots, to provide 
a helmsman with a sufficient arc of success.
  It  is  encouraging   that  this   analysis   has  provided 
seemingly  satisfactory  results,  however  it  is  recognised 
that more information and understanding can be obtained 
through more thorough analysis in further work.
Bibliography
Brown,  A.  J.  (2001)  SCC-1400 Draft Report: Modelling 
Structural Damage in Ship Collisions . US Department of 
Commerce.
Casson, L. and Steffy, J. R. (1991) The Athlit Ram. College 
Station, T exas A&M University Press.
Chalmers, D. W . (1993) Design of Ships’ Structures. London, 
HMSO.
Gardiner, R. et al (1995) The Age of the Galley: Mediterranean 
Oared Vessels since Pre-Classical Times . London, Conway 
Marine.
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F . and Rankov, N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme: The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship.  2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  Cambridge 
University Press.
Yankelevsky, D. Z. and Karinski, Y. S. (2000) Dynamic elasto-
plastic response of symmetrically loaded beams. Computers 
and Structures 76, 445–59.
===== PAGE 238 =====
30.  The Dimensions of the Ancient T rireme:  
a reconsideration of the evidence
Boris Rankov
In  establishing  the  dimensions  of  the  Olympias trireme 
reconstruction,  the  architect  of  the  ship,  John  Coates, 
began with the oarsystem and the accommodation of the 
170 rowers (Coates and McGrail 1984, 51–70; Morrison, 
Coates and Rankov 2000, 131–50). The naval inventories 
indicated that a fourth century Athenian trireme would 
have had 170 oars, of which 62 were thranites, 54 zygian 
and  54  thalamian  (IG  22  1615–18),  while  a  passage  of 
the Roman architect Vitruvius implied that the distance 
between each thole-pin (interscalmium) and therefore the 
‘room’ for each oarsman was two cubits long (Vitruvius 
De Architectura 1.2.4, cf. Morrison, Coates and Rankov 
2000, 133–5). Based on an Attic cubit of 0.444 m and 
therefore  an  interscalmium of  double  that  distance,  the 
oarsmen on each side of the ship would therefore take up 
a length of 31 × 0.888 = 27.53 m in the central portion 
of the ship. Moreover, as an hypothetical reconstruction 
of  an  Athenian  vessel  of  the  4th  century  BC,  the  ship 
had  to  fit  within  the  dimensions   of  the  best-known 
shipsheds  of  that  period,  excavated  by  Iakob  Dragatsis 
and Wilhelm Dörpfeld in the eastern part of Zea harbour 
in the Piraeus in 1885 (Dragatsis 1886). Dörpfeld’s plan 
and  sections  (Figs  30.1  and  30.2)  were  interpreted  to 
indicate that the sheds each had a maximum dry length 
of around 37 m and a maximum clear width of 5.94 m 
(Morrison and Williams 1968, 181–6 (by D. J. Blackman); 
Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 132–3). Taking this, 
other evidence and naval architectural requirements into 
consideration, Coates’ design resulted in a ship which had 
an overall breadth of 5.45 m and overall length of 36.8 m 
(see Frontispiece) (Morrison and Coates 1989, 17–25, esp. 
20). After the ship was launched in 1987, new evidence 
was published for an alternative cubit of 0.49 m in use in 
Attica at the same period, based on a metrological relief 
discovered on the island of Salamis in 1985 and now in 
the Piraeus Archaeological Museum (Dekoulakou-Sideris 
1990),  and  of  a  corresponding   foot-unit  of  0.327  m 
apparently employed in the newly-discovered naval arsenal 
of Philon in the Piraeus (Steinhauer 1989). Consequently 
it was proposed that the design should be modified in a 
notional Olympias Mark II to incorporate the longer cubit. 
This would result in an interscalmium of 0.98 m and an 
overall increase in breadth to 5.62 m and in length to 39.6 
m (Morrison 1993; Coates 1993; Morrison, Coates and 
Rankov 2000, 267–73).
  Since the publication of this last proposal, new excavation 
and survey of the Zea harbour sheds from 2001 onwards by 
the Greek-Danish Zea Harbour Project has revealed that 
the lower end of the sheds has been submerged by a rise 
in relative sea level since antiquity, and that their original 
dry length was much longer than had been thought. The 
sheds have now been traced as far out as 58.51 m from 
the interior of the back wall of the complex (Lovén 2011, 
100 and pl. 16), and it has become clear that there were 
at least three phases on the site, apparently consisting of 
open slipways in Phase 1, a normal-length group of sheds 
in Phase 2, and a group of sheds built on the foundations 
of the latter but extending c.13 m backwards up the shore; 
it is Phase 3 which is the clearest on Dörpfeld’s plan and 
sections, but features of Phase 2 are also visible on these 
and in the sea (Lovén et al. 2007, 63–6, esp. 65 and figs 4 
and 5; for the interpretation of these finds, see Blackman 
and  Rankov  et al.   forthcoming).  The  present  paper  is 
based on a close reconsideration of the plan and sections, 
on what they can tell us about the architectural layout of 
the  sheds,  and  about  what  this  implies  about  the  ships 
which they housed.
  The Phase 3 sheds were divided by alternating colonnades 
in  which  the  columns,  according  to  the  measurements 
shown   by  Dörpfeld   (Figs   30.1   and  30.2),   were  set 
3.38–3.39  m  and  2.16  m  apart  respectively,  measured 
interaxially.  It  was  deduced  from  this  by  Dragatsis  and 
Dörpfeld that a single gable roof covered each pair of sheds, 
with  the  widely-spaced  colonnade  supporting  the  ridge 
beam  and  the  narrowly-spaced  colonnades  supporting 
the heavy guttering on either side. My starting point is 
the  observation  that  there  was  a  precise  ratio  between 
the two interaxial distances of 11:7. This implies the use 
of a modular layout for the sheds, based on a module of 
30.8 cm (11 × 0.308 m = 3.388 m and 7 × 0.308 m = 
===== PAGE 239 =====
Boris Rankov226
2.156 cm) (Dörpfeld gives measurements to the nearest 
centimetre  only,  which  produces  a  margin  of  error  for 
all calculations from them; the figure of 30.8 cm for the 
proposed  module  is  that  which  best  fits  the  numerous 
relevant measurements on the plan and sections). 
  This  30.8  cm  figure  corresponds  to  a  known  foot-
module  of  between  c.  30.6  cm  and  30.8  cm,  usually 
referred to as a ‘common’ foot. This foot-module has been 
detected in a number of major Greek buildings, including 
the theatre at Epidauros (30.58 cm: Rottländer 1991–2) 
and the Parthenon (30.7 cm: De Waele 1984; cf. Wilson 
Jones 2000, 79–80, 88–91), and a 30.7 cm version has now 
been recognised also on the Salamis metrological relief. This 
relief, of which only the right-hand half survives, shows the 
top half of a human figure with arms outstretched, together 
with a separate forearm (pechus) to show a cubit, a straight 
foot-rule, a footprint (pous), and a hand with fingers spread 
to show digits (daktyloi) and a span (spithame). It is only the 
second such relief to have been discovered, and it has been 
the  focus  of  considerable  scrutiny  in  recent  scholarship 
(the other relief, which was discovered in the 17th century 
and  is  now  in  the  Ashmolean  Museum  at  Oxford,  has 
measurements of a different standard and is thought to 
have originated in the western part of Asia Minor). The 
original publication by Dekoulakou-Sideris measured the 
units  from  the  recessed  parts  of  the  relief  and  gave  the 
cubit as 48.7–48.8 cm, the foot-rule as 32.2 cm, and the 
footprint as 30.15 cm (Dekoulakou-Sideris 1990). Then, 
in 2000, Wilson Jones made a reassessment and argued 
that the units should be measured from the surface of the 
relief, and that the correct figures should be 49.1–49.2 cm 
for the cubit, 32.75–32.8 cm for the rule, and 30.6–30.7 
cm for the footprint (Wilson-Jones 2000). It may be, in 
fact, that both sets of measurements are correct, and that 
by  bevelling  the  cutting  of  the  units  from  the  surface 
to  the  bottom  the  relief  is  actually  showing  alternative 
measures,  like  the  builder’s  rule  (kanon)  recently  found 
in the Ma’agan Mikhael shipwreck off the coast of Israel: 
the lower and upper surfaces of the latter offered its user 
alternative foot-units of 33.3 cm (the ‘Philetaerian’ foot) 
Figure 30.1. Plan of the Zea shipsheds by Wilhelm Dörpfeld (Dragatsis 1886, pin.2).
===== PAGE 240 =====
30. The Dimensions of the Ancient Trireme 227
and 32.75 cm (the ‘Doric’ or ‘Solonian’ foot, as on the 
Salamis relief) respectively. Moreover, Stieglitz has recently 
argued, partly on the basis of this rule, that the 30.7 cm 
footprint on the Salamis relief represented a ‘common’ foot 
of 15 daktyloi compared to the ‘Doric/Solonian’ builder’s 
foot of 16 daktyloi (Stieglitz 2006). 
  The recognition that a particular foot-module was being 
employed for proportional layout of the Phase 3 Zea sheds 
allows us to make much more sense of the architectural 
plan. The next step is to note that the overall width of 
the  individual  sheds,  given  by  Dörpfeld  as  6.49,  6.54, 
6.50 (?), 13.03 (for two sheds), 6.53, 6.50, 6.49 and 6.47 
m respectively from north to south, appears to be three 
times the length of the interaxis of the narrowly-spaced 
colonnades at 2.16 m. Although at first glance, it would 
appear that the average width of the sheds at around 6.50 
cm is a little too long for this, it should be remembered 
that the purpose of the sheds was to take Athenian triremes, 
and that the significant figure was not their average but 
their  minimum width.  Dörpfeld’s  figures  interpreted  in 
the  light  of  the  30.8  cm  foot-module  fit  this  perfectly 
(2.156 m × 3 = 6.468 m), and the designed overall width 
of the sheds may therefore be recognised as 21 ‘common’ 
feet.
  The most important figure from the point of view of 
accommodating a trireme was, however, the clear width 
at the ship’s widest point, the outrigger at the top of the 
hull. This depended on the diameter of the columns at that 
height. Dragatsis gives the diameter of the column drums 
he found at Zea as 58 cm (Dragatsis 1886, 67), although 
Dörpfeld appears consistently to have drawn them on his 
plan and sections at around 70 cm (3.5 mm at 1:200). 
Meanwhile, thirteen column drums, almost certainly from 
ship sheds, which were dredged up in the north-western 
part of the harbour in 1964, have been measured by the 
Zea Harbour Project, and a column of three drums made 
up from these would have had a lower drum tapering from 
c. 67 cm diameter at the bottom to c. 63 cm at the top, 
a middle drum tapering from c. 63 to c. 58 cm, and an 
upper drum tapering from c. 58 to c. 53 cm (Lovén 2011: 
89–97, esp. tables 6.9; 6.10, 6.11); the famous Deutsches 
Archäologisches   Institut  photograph  of  the  Zea  sheds 
shows  tapering  columns  from  the  Dragatisis/Dörpfeld 
excavation which are of similar proportions to these. Given 
the  evidence  presented  here  for  modular  design  in  the 
sheds, these figures are consistent with a designed column 
diameter at around outrigger height (roughly one third of 
the way up the middle drum, depending on the height of 
the ramp), of around two ‘common’ feet (61.6 cm). It is 
thus reasonable to suggest that the intended clear width 
of the sheds was 21–2 = 19 feet (5.852 m), and it would 
certainly have been very close to that figure.
  If the shed was designed to provide a minimum clear 
width  of  19  feet,  then  we  must  assume  that  the  ships 
for  which  they  were  built  would  themselves  have  been 
constructed  to  a  maximum  width  in  order  to  fit  inside 
Figure 30.2. Sections of the Zea shipsheds by Wilhelm Dörpfeld (Dragatsis 1886, pin. 3).

===== PAGE 241 =====
Boris Rankov228
them. As Graser realised when he made the first detailed 
survey  of  the  sheds  in  1871  (Graser  1872,  22–3),  the 
intended fit would have been tight, both to save space and 
in order to reduce the potential danger to the sheds from 
accidental toppling of a ship; the smaller the distance over 
which a ship could topple, the less the force with which 
it could strike the columns (cf. Coates, above pp. 135–6). 
It was for precisely this reason that John Coates, working 
to his estimated clear width at Zea of 5.94 m, designed 
Olympias  to  be  5.45  m  wide,  allowing  a  space  between 
outrigger and column of 24.5 cm on either side; in his 
modified design based on the cubit shown in the Salamis 
relief, the ship’s width was increased to 5.62 m, allowing a 
space of only 16 cm on either side (Morrison, Coates and 
Rankov 2000, 133, 272). The most obvious figure for the 
maximum width of the ship would therefore be only about 
a foot less than the clear width, i.e. c. 18 feet, which would 
allow a space of 15.4 cm on either side of the outrigger. 
One attraction of this particular figure is that 18 feet is the 
equivalent of exactly 12 cubits, and as Basch (1983) has 
pointed out, our literary and epigraphic evidence suggests 
that  ships  were  normally  laid  out  in  cubits  rather  than 
feet (cf. the dimensions given for Ptolemy IV’s ‘forty’ in 
Athenaeus (5.203e–204b), for the Isis freighter by Lucian 
(Navigatio 5), and for the 9 and 9.5-cubit oars listed in 
the  epigraphic  inventories  from  the  Piraeus;  from  this, 
Basch has also argued that the dimensions of the Athlit 
ram were based on an Attic cubit of 0.444 m.).
  This figure is attractive for another reason. As already 
noted, the epigraphic naval inventories record that triremes 
had 170 oars, of which 62 were thranite probably at the 
top level, 54 were zygian, probably at the middle level, 
and 54 were thalamian, probably at the lower level (IG 22 
1615–18). This means that in modern terms there would 
have been 31 ‘rooms’ for the thranite rowers on each side 
of the ship, 27 for the zygians, and 27 for the thalamians, 
and it was the maximum length of these ‘rooms’ around 
which  John  Coates  built  his  design  for  Olympias..  As 
already noted, however, Vitruvius refers to the space for 
each  rower  as  an  interscalmium,  which  literally  means 
‘between  the  thole-pins  (Lat.  scalmi,  Gk.  skalmoi)’  and 
says that the Greek expression for this was dipeciaca (for 
dipechiake or dipechuia), i.e. a two-cubit space (Morrison 
and Williams 1968, 181–6 (by D.J. Blackman); Morrison 
et al. 2000, 132–3). The terms were clearly shipbuilding 
expressions and taken together suggest that this distance 
was  used  as  a  design  module.  It  is  thus  reasonable  to 
deduce that the oarsystem would itself have been part of 
the modular design of the ship, and that it would have been 
measured between the thole-pins at each end. Certainly, at 
the beginning of the 18th century, Jean Antoine de Barras 
de la Penne, one of Louis XIV’s galley captains, proposed 
that the dimensions of a contemporary galley should be 
proportional  to  the  sum  of  the  interscalmia,  known  as 
the longueur de vogue (Jean Antoine, Marquis de Barras 
de la Penne, Description Abregée d’une Galère Moderne in 
La Science des Galères (Paris c. 1693–1727), Bibliothèque 
Nationale Ms. Fr. 9177, 146ro–172ro, cited by Lehmann 
1995, 110). Between the bowmost and sternmost thranite 
thole-pins   there  would  have  been  30  spaces,  and  26 
between  the  corresponding  zygian  and  thalamian  pins. 
The maximum length of the oarsystem for an Athenian 
trireme  of  the  late  fourth  century  BC  would  thus  have 
been 30 × 2 = 60 cubits, which is of course exactly five 
times the ship’s width proposed here.
  If there was indeed such a proportionality between the 
ship’s width and the oarsystem in the central section of the 
hull, one would also expect a proportionality between the 
width and the overall length of the ship. It has in any case 
usually been assumed that ancient galleys had hulls which 
were approximately seven times as long as they were broad, 
compared with merchant vessels which were only three or 
four times as long (cf. for instance McGrail 2001, 153), 
and clearly this figure would fit very well with a central 
section  of  the  ship  which  was  five  times  as  long  as  the 
width (i.e. the bow:oarsystem:stern proportions would be 
1:5:1). If so, the Zea sheds are likely have been designed 
to take triremes which were 12 cubits (18 feet) wide and 
84 cubits (126 feet) long, i.e. 5.54 m by 38.81 m. These 
would  have  been  the  architect’s  ‘ideal’  triremes,  based 
likewise on a ‘common’ foot of 0.308 m and therefore on 
a cubit of 0.308 × 1.5 = 0.462 m and an interscalmium of 
0.462 × 2 = 0.924 m, although ships of similar or smaller 
dimensions could also have been accommodated. It may 
be noted incidentally that such triremes could still have 
incorporated a canted oar system such as that proposed 
by Shaw and Coates (above pp. 76–91). 
  A  ship  of  38.81  m,  with  its  stern  exactly  level  with 
the upper end of the ramp, would have the tip of its ram 
level with both the 12th long-interaxis column and the 
18th short-interaxis column from the top. If the ship had 
been horizontal, it would have reached to the lower end 
of column bases in each case. This is because the top end 
of the ramp was laid out to begin where the base of the 
putative short-interaxis column which was replaced by the 
spur wall would have ended, so that there were 18 spaces 
of 7 common feet each. On the other side, this equated 
to 11.45 interaxial spaces of 11 feet each, but significantly 
the  columns  of  the  long-interaxis  colonnades  were  laid 
out  to  line  up  with  those  of  the  short-axis  colonnades 
at precisely this point. This is one of only two places on 
Dörpfeld’s plan where the long-interaxis and short-interaxis 
columns align (Lovén 2011, 159–61 with table 8.4) and 
are directly over the bases of Phase 2 columns (see below 
and Fig. 30.1); the other is at the 5th long-interaxis and 
7th short-interaxis column from the top, located over the 
Phase 2 column bases situated alongside the top end of 
the  Phase  2  ramp  (see  Dörpfeld’s  upper  section  in  Fig. 
30.2).  It  is  very  likely,  in  fact,  that  the  Phase  3  sheds 
were laid out over the Phase 2 sheds from precisely these 
architecturally   significant   alignments   (Blackman   and 
Rankov  et al.   forthcoming).  The  sheds  were,  of  course, 
planned horizontally, but because the ships within them 
would have been on a gradient of 1:10.5 they would, if they 
===== PAGE 242 =====
30. The Dimensions of the Ancient Trireme 229
were precisely 84 cubits/126 feet long, have reached c. 17.5 
cm less far horizontally than the lower end of the column 
bases, so that the tips of their rams would have been level 
with parts of the columns themselves. Visually, of course, 
the effect would have been that the ships appeared to be 
housed in a demarcated upper section of the sheds. 
  Comparison  with  the  small  complex  of  six  sheds  of 
roughly  the  same  period  found  at  Oiniadai  in Western 
Greece  (Sears  1904)  provides   a  strong  corroboration 
of  the  proportions  proposed  for  the  Zea  triremes.  The 
Oiniadai sheds are of particular value for this because they 
are the only sheds of which the lower ends can be firmly 
identified. The colonnades here are evenly spaced and have 
an average interaxis of 2.25 m or 2.2575 m. These can be 
equated with 7 feet of 0.3214 m or 0.3225 m respectively. 
Meanwhile, their clear width is reported as 6.76 m or 6.78 
m, which would equate to 21 feet or 0.3219 m or 0.3229 
m respectively. These are in fact tiny discrepancies with a 
total range of only 1.5 mm, and the module looks very 
like the Salamis foot-rule foot of 0.322 m, which can also 
be detected in cubit form in the Phase 3 long-interaxis 
colonnade at Zea (see below). Column drums are recorded 
at between 0.75 m and 0.60 m in diameter, which is again 
consistent with a diameter of around 2 feet (= 0.644 m) 
at outrigger height, again giving a clear width of 19 feet 
(=  6.12  m)  The  lower  end  of  the  shed  is  marked  by  a 
strong stone pier of T-shaped plan in place of a column, 
to support the ship as it is launched or comes out of the 
water, and there are 18 further columns and an engaged 
half-column  at  the  top  of  each  colonnade,  with  a  total 
of 17 interaxial spaces of  c. 2.2575 m with a further 2 
averaging 2.135 m each at the top. The upper end of each 
ramp is situated between the engaged half-column and the 
uppermost column, at a distance which can be calculated 
as c. 41.54 m = c. 129 feet from the lower end of the shed 
(Sears 1904; Kolonas 1989–90; Blackman and Rankov et 
al. forthcoming.). 
  At first glance, the Oiniadai sheds would appear to have 
been designed for ships of the same proportions as the Zea 
sheds but built to a Salamis foot-rule foot module of 0.322 
m, and therefore slightly broader at 5.80 m and slightly 
longer  at  40.57  m.  The  reasons  for  suspecting  that  the 
situation is not quite so simple is firstly that such a ship 
would leave very little room for movement and restrict lines 
of sight across the sheds at the bottom of a 41.54 m ramp, 
and secondly that the piers of T-shaped plan at the lower 
end of the sheds appear to be of the same width as the 
rock-cut bays which took the actual column bases. These 
bays are shown on Sears’ plan as 1.00 m wide, probably 
the equivalent of 3 feet (i.e. 0.966 m). If so, this would 
have reduced the actual mouth of the sheds to a width 
of 21–3 = 18 feet, which would be too tight for a ship of 
that width. Since the Oiniadai complex may have been 
an Athenian naval outpost (Xen.  Hell. 4.6.14, referring 
to 389 BC), the explanation could be that the sheds were 
built, using a larger foot-module, for ships such as those 
housed in the roughly contemporary Zea Phase 3 sheds 
of the same proportions. One may compare the shed at 
the northern end of the Zea complex which was laid-out 
differently from and probably slightly later than the Phase 
3  sheds  to  the  south  on  the  other  side  of  the  dividing 
fire-wall.  This  northern  shed  is  otherwise  of  the  same 
dimensions as one of the Phase 3 sheds, but its colonnade 
had an interaxis of 3.43 m according to Dörpfeld’s plan. 
This would equate to 7 cubits of 0.49 m, corresponding to 
Wilson-Jones’ interpretation of the Salamis cubit as a Doric 
cubit of 0.491–0.492 m. This shed thus uses a different 
type of module to achieve similar internal dimensions.
  Finally, it may be suggested that a slightly differently-
proportioned  type  of  trireme  may  originally  have  been 
housed in the Phase 2 sheds at Zea. It has been argued 
here that the Phase 3 sheds at Zea had colonnades with 
interaxes of 7 common feet (2.156 m) and 11 common 
feet (3.388 m) respectively, but the latter figure would also 
be equivalent to 7 cubits of 0.484 m based on a foot of 
0.3226 m, which would be very close to the length of both 
the Salamis foot rule and the foot-module employed at 
Oiniadai. This is unlikely to be a coincidence, both because 
of the proposed 1:7 ship ratio and because an interaxis of 
7 cubits would have practical value for the establishment 
of the gradient of the shed. This gradient could most easily 
have been achieved by surveying a drop of a certain number 
of feet or cubits between the appropriate column bases. 
Thus, for Zea Phase 3, where Dörpfeld’s levels suggest a 
gradient of around 1:10.5, the architect could have used 
a drop of 2 feet/2 cubits over three interaxial spaces of 7 
feet/7 cubits each (2 ÷ 21 = 10.5) (Blackman and Rankov 
et al. forthcoming). The northern shed, as we have seen, 
was laid out using an interaxis of 7 slightly different cubits. 
Given the proposed significance for shipbuilding of the 
figure seven, it is no surprise to find interaxial modules 
which are seven feet or cubits long. The Phase 2 colonnades 
at Zea, however, do not correspond to this pattern, since 
their interaxes can be scaled from Dörpfeld’s plan at more 
or less exactly 4.00 m, which would correspond to 13 of 
the Zea common feet (13 × 0.308 = 4.004 m) (Blackman 
and Rankov et al. forthcoming). 
  If the interaxis did relate in some way to the proportions 
of the trireme being housed, then it may be suggested that 
the breadth:length ratio of the latter could in this case have 
been 1:6.5, even though the clear width of the Phase 2 
sheds was identical with that of the Phase 3 sheds, and 
indeed must have determined it. Such a trireme would have 
been 12 cubits wide and 78 cubits long, and the length 
could  have  been  based  on  taking  the  longueur de vogue 
not from the thranite level of 30 interscalmia but from the 
zygian or thalamian level of 26 interscalmia. The central 
section of the ship would thus have been regarded as being 
26 × 2 = 52 cubits in length, and the designed longitudinal 
proportions  of  the  ship  would  have  been  1:4:1,  i.e.  13 
cubits  at  the  bow,  4  ×  13  cubits  in  the  centre,  and  13 
cubits in the stern, whilst the breadth would have been 12 
cubits as with the later vessels. The overall dimensions of 
such a ship would then be 12 cubits (18 feet) = 5.54 m by 
===== PAGE 243 =====
Boris Rankov230
78 cubits (117 feet) = 36.04 m. The ramp of the Phase 2 
sheds was probably 128 common feet (39.42 m) in length 
(very similar to the foot-length at Oiniadai) (Blackman 
and Rankov et al. forthcoming), so that such a ship would 
have sat comfortably upon it with plenty of space to pass 
at the lower end. If, however, there was a subsequent move 
in shipbuilding fashion towards a 1:7 ratio, producing an 
84-cubit (126-foot) ship of 38.81 m in length, this would 
have  created  a  much  tighter  fit,  resulting  in  difficulties 
with movement and lines of sight across the shed at the 
lower end. This tight fit might eventually have led to a 
decision at Zea to extend the sheds backwards to provide 
easier movement and more storage space, leading to the 
demolition  of  the  Phase  2  sheds  and  their  replacement 
with the much longer Phase 3 sheds.
  The  arguments  presented  here  have  sometimes  been 
somewhat   tentative   but  are  based   on  the  observed 
dimensions  and  proportions  of  three  different  layouts 
of  shipshed  at  Zea  and  a  fourth  at  Oiniadai,  and  the 
ship  dimensions  proposed  all  have  the  merit  of  fitting 
comfortably and logically within their respective sheds:
Zea Phase 2:  Ratio 1:6.5  12  cubits  (5.54  m)  ×  78 
cubits (36.04)
Zea Phase 3:  Ratio 1:7  12  cubits  (5.54  m)  ×  84 
cubits (38.81 m)
Zea northern shed:  Ratio 1: 7  Same as Zea Phase 3 (?)
Oiniadai:  Ratio 1:7  Same as Zea Phase 3 (?)
For comparison, Olympias as built has a ratio of 1:6.75 and 
dimensions of 5.45 m × 36.80 m, and the Olympias Mark 
II design (Morrison, Coates and Rankov 2000, 267–73) 
has a ratio of 1:7 and dimensions of 5.62 m × 39.6 m. 
The most significant conclusion here, however, lies not in 
the dimensions themselves, but in the evidence presented 
which suggests that triremes, like the sheds which housed 
them, were built according to modular and proportional 
principles. What is also clear is that the sheds and the ships 
would have been built in such way that the former could 
receive the latter, but that this could be achieved by the 
architects in a variety of different ways.
 
Bibliography
Basch, L. (1983) The cubit as a nautical unit of measurement 
in Antiquity. The Mariner’s Mirror 69.3, 248–9.
Blackman,  D.  J.  and  Rankov,  N.  B.  et al.   (forthcoming) 
Shipsheds of the Ancient Mediterranean. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press.
Coates,  J.  F . (1993)  Development of  the  Design. In Shaw 
(1993), 71–4.
Coates, J. F . and McGrail, S. (eds) (1984) The Greek Trireme of 
the Fifth Century BC: Discussion of a projected reconstruction 
at the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich. Greenwich, 
T rustees of the National Maritime Museum.
De Waele, J. (1984) Der Entwurf des Parthenon. In Berger, 
E. (ed.), Parthenon-Kongress Basel: Referate und Berichte, 
4. bis 8. April 1982 . Mainz, Verlag Philipp von Zabern, 
99–114. 
Dekoulakou-Sideris,  E.  (1990)  A  metrological  relief  from 
Salamis. American Journal of Archaeology 94, 445–51.
Dragatsis,   I.  Ch.  (1886)   Ekthesis   peri  ton  en  Peiraiei 
anaskaphon.   Praktika tes en Athenais Arkhaiologikes 
Hetairias tou etous 1885, 63–68.
Graser, B. (1872) Meine Messungen in den Altathenischen 
Kriegshafen. Philologus 31, 1–65. 
Kolonas,  L.  (1989–90)   Anaskaphe   Oiniadon:   ta  neoria. 
Archaiognosia 6, 153–9.
Lehmann,  L.  Th.  (1995)  The Polyeric Quest. Renaissance 
and Baroque Theories about Ancient Men-of-War. 2nd ed. 
Amsterdam, De Gouden Reaal.
Lovén, B. et al. (2007) The Zea Harbour Project: the first six 
years. In Hallager, E. and Tae Jensen, J. (eds), Proceedings 
of the Danish Institute at Athens  V, 61–74.
Lovén, B. (2011) The Ancient Harbours of the Piraeus. Volume 
I.1 – The Zea Shipsheds and Slipways: Archaeology and 
T opography. Athens, Danish Institute at Athens.
McGrail, S. (2001) Boats of the World from the Stone Age to 
Medieval Times. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Morrison, J. S. (1993) Trireis: the evidence from Antiquity, 
In Shaw (1993), 11–20.
Morrison,   J.  S.  and   Coates,   J.  F.  (eds)   (1989)   An 
Athenian Trireme Reconstructed. The British Sea Trials of 
Olympias, 1987. BAR International Series 486. Oxford, 
Archaeopress.
Morrison, J. S. and Williams, R. T . (1968) Greek Oared Ships 
900–322 B.C. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Morrison, J. S., Coates, J. F . and Rankov, N. B. (2000) The 
Athenian Trireme. The History and Reconstruction of an 
Ancient Greek Warship. 2nd  ed.  Cambridge,  Cambridge 
University Press.
Rottländer, R. C. A. (1991–2) Eine neue aufgefundene antike 
Massenheit auf dem metrologischen Relief von Salamis. 
Jahreshefte des Österreichischen Archäologischen Instituts in 
Wien 61, 63–8.
Sears, J. M. (1904) Oiniadae VI. The Ship Sheds. American 
Journal of Archaeology 8.2, 227–37.
Shaw, J. T . (1993) The Trireme Project. Operational Experience 
1987–90. Lessons Learnt. Oxford, Oxbow Books.
Steinhauer, G. (1989) Excavations: Piraeus: Philon’s Arsenal (in 
Greek). Arkhaiologikon Deltion (Khronikon) 44, 50–5.
Stieglitz,  R.  R.  (2006)  Classical  Greek  measures  and  the 
builder’s instruments from the Ma’agan Mikhael shipwreck. 
American Journal of Archaeology 110.2, 195–203.
Wilson-Jones, M.  (2000)  Doric  measure  and  architectural 
design 1: the evidence of the relief from Salamis. American 
Journal of Archaeology 104.1, 73–93.
===== PAGE 244 =====
31. Battle Manoeuvres for Fast T riremes
1. Introduction
In the accounts of ancient authors, it is common to find 
triremes operating in multiples of five or ten. T rireme 
fleets that were acknowledged as slow seem to have formed 
squadrons in multiples of 5, while fast formations operated 
much more frequently in multiples of 10. The minimum 
frontage occupied by five triremes in line abreast, spaced 
as closely as plausible, would have been of the order 100 
m, based on the 10.8 m width of Olympias from oar-tip 
to oar-tip and allowing a similar sized gap between ships. 
This space roughly matches the minimum-radius turn 
reported for Olympias (a diameter of 62 m: Coates et al., 
1990, 30) plus an extra margin for the width of the ship 
and some clearance from any neighbours. This provides 
a possible explanation for the multiple of five associated 
with slow fleets. This tightest reported turn resulted in a 
halving of the ship’s speed during the turn, and hence has 
in this paper been termed a ‘slow turn’ or ‘tight anastrophe’. 
T urns where Olympias maintained a higher proportion of 
its initial boat speed on entering the turn had minimum 
diameters ranging from 107 to 120 m. Allowing for the 
width of the ship and clearance from neighbours, the 
space required for these ‘fast turns’ is thus approximately 
double that of the tightest possible turn, and matches the 
frontage that would be occupied by ten ships in a closely-
spaced line abreast. Exploring this convergence between 
the numbers of ships reported by ancient authors and 
the reported turning diameters and speeds from the sea 
trials of Olympias was a major motivation for the detailed 
modelling work reported here. 
 This paper first seeks to demonstrate how the results of 
a series of six trials with Olympias were applied to produce 
a model of her movement through the water, and how that 
model was adapted to take account of the modifications 
proposed in this volume for the construction of a Mark 
IIb ‘fast trireme’ (above, pp. 76–91). The model is then 
used in the latter part of the paper to investigate a variety 
of tactical scenarios involving both individual vessels and 
squadrons arranged in multiples of five and ten, and 
Andrew T aylor
thus to establish some quantitative parameters for fleet 
manouevres in battle. Finally, a tactical paradigm is offered 
for engagements between ancient trireme fleets. 
1.1. The dynamics model 
For the purposes of this paper, a dynamics model was 
developed to model the manoeuvres of Olympias reported 
by Lowry and Squire (1988), Coates et al. (1990, 20–31, 
69–89) and Shaw (1993, 45–7). The parameters of this 
model were then adjusted to fit the proposed changes 
for a hypothetical Mark IIb T rireme that incorporates 
the design and operational lessons from Olympias (see 
pp. 76–91 above). The resulting model thus provides a 
plausible hypothetical estimate of the dynamics of a fast 
ancient trireme. In the final part of the paper, the model 
will be used to evaluate the space and time constraints 
associated with the types of manoeuvres which triremes 
seem to have undertaken when approaching and operating 
in close proximity to an enemy force.
 The mathematical models for the dynamics of 
Olympias 
and a proposed Mark IIb fast trireme were developed using 
Excel spreadsheets. The physical parameters considered 
within the model are discussed in what follows and the 
related numerical values are tabulated in Table 31.1. Since 
the model was developed and tested against the observed 
motions of Olympias, these parameters will be discussed 
first. In detail, the turns fitted are those presented by 
Coates et al. (1990, 87–88) in their tables F and G. Here 
the turns are labelled F1–F6 and G1–G5 as sequentially 
listed in their tables.
2. Parameters for Olympias
2.1. Linear forward motion
The linear acceleration of the ship allows for an apparent 
mass 10% larger than the ship’s actual assumed displacement. 
The drag measured in towing tests with Olympias is given 
by Coates et al.  (1990, 54) in the form of parametric 
===== PAGE 245 =====
Andrew T aylor232
equations as a function of speed in three separate speed 
bands. These produce a relationship broadly similar to that 
plotted for a Mark IIb trireme, as in Fig. 31.1.
 An extra increment of linear drag equal to 1.4 times 
the straight rudder drag is included to allow for the extra 
turbulence associated with an applied rudder angle of 67.5 
degrees. This is reduced to 0.6 for a rudder angle of 45 
degrees and 0.2 for the 22.5 degrees rudder angle when 
modelling the reported Kempf Manoeuvre. Once entered 
into a turn, the linear drag on the ship will increase as a 
result of drift angle, the angle between the ship’s heading 
and its forward linear motion. This increased resistance 
is calculated assuming that the water’s resistance acts at 
an angle (of half the drift angle) from forward of the 
perpendicular to the ship’s track. The adopted value for the 
effective lateral cross section deflecting water during a turn 
is very close to the actual cross section of the wetted hull. 
The sum of the longitudinal drags compares reasonably well 
with the expected oar thrust from measured power outputs 
on rowing machines and estimated efficiency factors. The 
   
   


  










   
   
   
   

   

   
   
   
   

   

   
   
T able 31.1. Model parameters used to fit the observed performance of Olympias recorded during sea trials and to extend the 
model to predict the dynamics possible for an optimised fast, Mark IIb trireme design:
Figure 31.1. Force relationships for an optimised Mark IIb fast trireme. The drag curve is based on the parameterised summary 
provided by Shaw (1990) for Olympias but with increased surface drag and less disruptive rudders. The oar thrust assumes a 
skilled crew operating an optimised oar rig with more room per rower and increased separation of their blades. The adopted 
linear relationship follows a line that would drop to zero thrust at a speed of 18 knots. 
===== PAGE 246 =====
31. Battle Manoeuvres for Fast Triremes 233
thrust generated by the oar-crew has been matched to the 
sum of the hull and straight rudder drags for Olympias at 
the entry speed given in the reported turn data, thereby 
providing a steady-state entry speed. Since these values are 
well below the maximum reported capabilities of the crews 
they are assumed to have remained constant throughout 
the turn if both sides continued rowing, or halved if the 
inside oar-bank stopped rowing.
2.2. Turning motion
The lateral force on the hull provided by the reaction 
force of the water deflected as it flows past the hull is 
the main factor in determining the turning diameter for 
the ship. The water, with a density of 1025 kg m -3, is 
deflected by the drift angle and its change in momentum 
gives the magnitude of the impulse changing the direction 
of the ship’s track through the water. The turning force, 
perpendicular to the motion of the ship, due to the 
rudder has been estimated as a fraction of the rudders’ 
along-track drag, typically ranging from 40 to 80%. The 
actual fraction used was determined from a polynomial 
fit of the rudders angle, Φ, with respect to the ship’s track 
through the water. 
 Coefficient = 0.14 + 0.020 Φ – 0.00015 × Φ2
The torque applied by the rudder on the ship has been 
determined using the distance from the rudder to the 
centre of mass of the ship. Several of the turns were 
achieved by getting the oar-crew on one side of the ship 
to stop rowing. This turning moment has also been 
considered with a lever arm running from the centre-line 
of the ship to halfway between the outer oar tips and the 
inner edge of the thalamian oar-blades. The resistance of 
the water to rotation of the ship about its centre of mass 
has been determined by multiplying the moment of inertia 
by the angular yaw rate squared. This decision to model 
rotation about the vertical axis through the centre of mass 
of the ship, rather than rotation about the centre of lateral 
resistance is a principal difference from the UCL model 
discussed below. The resisting torque for rotation (yaw 
rate) was modelled as a simple function of the angular 
velocity (ω) squared with a suitable constant, Ω, that has 
an order of magnitude similar to that of the moment of 
inertia of the ship. 
 Resisting torque = Ω ω 2 
2.3. Angle of heel
A key constraint for maintaining boat speed with Olympias 
in a turn is the extent of heel experienced (see Taylor, pp. 
50–7). A heel angle of the order of 3° leads to problems 
for rowers on the inside of a turn with getting their oars 
into the water, and for those on the outside with getting 
their oars out. The oar-rig in Olympias was designed to 
work with a heel of up to 3°. Within the model the heel 
was calculated by balancing the tipping moments of the 
rudder and the lateral resistance of the water in a turn 
with stability implied by treating the ship as a simple 
pendulum with a length equal to the metacentric height. 
The actual height of the centre of gravity above the under 
side of the keel (USK) was used to determine the response 
of the ship to the lateral resistance of the water while the 
effective height, 0.2 m lower, was used in determining the 
metacentric height, since the crew will tend to lean during 
a turn putting their effective centre of mass at the height 
of their seats. The maximum heel angles generated within 
the model calculations match the 3° constraint reasonably 
closely and therefore did not require any extra reduction in 
the oar thrust due to this factor to be included in the model.
3. Actual turns fitted by the model
The actual turn data fitted are summarised by Coates et 
al. (1990, 87–88). Some observations about fitting those 
data are included here for those interested in the detailed 
development of the model. 
 In general the T rust Crew, G1–G5, had a distinctly 
flat set of measured oar-thrusts for speeds 4 to 7 knots. 
It therefore seems reasonable to assume that the crew 
maintained their effective thrust throughout the turns, or 
at least something near it provided the ship did not heel 
too much. The entry speeds for the G2 and F2 turns were 
unusually low and I have assumed that the crew increased 
their output in the turn to more closely match those 
achieved in the other turns. Since the G3 turn did not get 
completed it is not so useful for analysing the drift angle 
during a turn. The lower average true speed also suggests 
that oar thrust dropped during the turn.
 The various estimates of yaw rate suggest that steady 
state turning is occurring well before the ship has turned 
to 90° from its initial heading. The difference in time 
between the ship’s head and ship’s track turning to 90° 
therefore gives a good estimate of the steady state drift 
angle. These values have a fairly large uncertainty but 
match the expectations for drift angle, as required by the 
centripetal force needed for the turns, rather better than 
some of those stated in the text of the 1988 Report (Lowry 
and Squire 1988). For example, the drift angle stated for 
the G1 and G2 turns with full rudder applied and the 
full oar crew rowing is 15° ± 2°. This does not relate very 
well to the 3-second delay between the ship’s head and 
the ship’s track going through 90 degrees to the starting 
bearing. That is, the delay times the yaw rate = 3 × 2.6 = 
7.8° for the drift angle. Presumably the stated drift angles 
were measured over a wider variety of turn angles; however, 
we should probably assume the lower value.
 The turn data reported for the Hellenic Navy crew, 
F1–F6, include a much wider variety of applied rudder 
angles in addition to data with a lower oar thrust with 
only the thranites rowing in several trials. These data were 
particularly relevant in constraining the model prior to 
fitting the data recorded in the Kempf manoeuvre. The 
implied oar thrust on entry to F1, the turn with the 
smallest applied rudder angle, is difficult to reconcile 
with the total drag figure. The long duration of the timed 
===== PAGE 247 =====
Andrew T aylor234
turn is a possible cause for the reduction in oar thrust. 
Measurement uncertainties might account for the rest 
of the discrepancy but would need to be fairly extreme, 
while increasing the rudder drag significantly would cause 
problems for the 45° rudder-angle turns. T urns F5 and F6 
had slightly low entry speeds compared with that prior to 
their other turns. The half crew rowing in each case could 
easily have increased their efforts to produce oar thrusts 
more similar to half that on previous turns with the full 
crew rowing.
 The Kempf or Zig-Zag manoeuvre data provided key 
data on how rapidly Olympias entered and came out 
of turns, i.e. both the moment of inertia and the drag 
associated with rotation of the ship about its vertical axis. 
The advance and transfer of the various reported turning 
curves provided extra data in how the quickly the ship 
responded to an unbalanced torque applied by the rudder 
or as a result of half the oar-crew stopping rowing.
4. Comparison with other modelling
The results of the model articulated in the manoeuvres 
presented in this paper were compared with similar 
output from a modelling project undertaken by the 
Mechanical Engineering Department of University 
College, London (Prof. Simon Rusling and Dr T ristan 
Smith, pers. com. 2006). Although the work at UCL used 
a more conventional approach in modelling the trireme, 
the results were in close agreement, principally as a result 
of fitting the parameters to the same original data set from 
sea trials with Olympias. 
5. Changes from Olympias to a hypothetical fast 
Mark IIb trireme
One significant outcome from the trireme project has been 
a series of proposals about how to improve the performance 
of a vessel conceived along the lines of Olympias but based 
on the operational experience obtained with Olympias 
and more recent archaeological evidence. The principal 
modifications incorporate a modest lengthening in the 
design, the slight canting or skewing of the rowers’ seats, 
and an increase in the lateral separation of the oar blades 
by further refining the ‘wine-glass’ cross section of the hull. 
Allowing the crew to reach past the rower next astern and 
therefore deliver a 50% longer stroke would significantly 
improve the efficiency with which the oar-crew convert 
their power output to an effective thrust driving the 
ship. The design and operational experience gained with 
Olympias suggest that these changes could be achieved 
with only minor changes in the other dynamic parameters 
of the manoeuvring model discussed here (see above pp. 
76–91 and the references there for a much more detailed 
discussion of these issues). Key parameters used to model 
the dynamics of a hypothetical fast Mark IIb trireme are 
included in Table 31.1.
5.1. Physical dimensions for Mark IIb
To accommodate the extra room for the rowers on the 
proposed Mark IIb fast trireme, the overall length of the 
ship is assumed to be increased by 3 metres. Combined 
with some lightening of the structure it is envisaged that 
the displacement would increase by just two tonnes to 44 
tonnes. It is assumed that the main mast, yard, sail and 
associated gear would have been landed prior to battle 
and these are not included in the mass balance. Increased 
confidence in the stability of the ship should allow a 
slight reduction of 0.1 m in the metacentric height. This 
also allows for a slight increase in the width of the ship, 
separating the oar blades laterally, whilst still ensuring that 
the design could fit between the pillars of the surviving 
remains of ancient ship sheds. 
 The increase in the wetted surface area of the hull 
would lead to an increase in the frictional drag of the hull, 
in direct proportion to the increased length; the draft is 
assumed to remain the same as for Olympias. No attempt 
has been made to model the change in wave making 
resistance associated with the increased length since this is 
a relatively minor component in the overall hull resistance 
for Olympias. Although it might have a greater influence 
at the higher speeds discussed for a Mark IIb trireme the 
assumptions about the magnitude and duration of the 
total possible effective oar thrust will probably dominate 
these subtleties. Based on the Froude number, peaks in 
the wave-making resistance for the Mark IIb hull would 
occur at 6.5, 8.2 and 10.6 knots; peaks that comfortably 
bracket the expected range of maximum speeds of from 
9 to10 knots postulated for a fast trireme and provide 
another window of low resistance for the sorts of cruising 
speeds, around 7.6 knots, required to match the long day’s 
row reported in Xenophon (see Shaw, 1993, 64 and above 
pp. 63–7). The actual formulae used to calculate the hull 
drag are based on the parametric equations from Coates 
et al. (1990, 74) and presented in Table 31.1. 
 The drag from fully immersed straight rudders on 
Olympias is of the same order of magnitude as that for 
the whole of the rest of the hull. This model assumes 
an optimised rudder design with a minimum drag one 
quarter of the full value measured for Olympias; a value 
near that assumed for the minimum drag achieved with 
partially immersed rudders during maximum speed runs 
with Olympias. The increased along-track drag associated 
with an applied rudder varied by a factor between 0.6 and 
3.25 times the straight rudder value; broadly in line with 
that assumed for the Olympias modelling. The relationship 
of drag with boat speed can be seen in Fig. 31.1.
5.2. Oar thrust for Mark IIb
In separate sets of sea-trials with widely different oar-crews 
in terms of numbers, levels of fitness and skill, Olympias 
demonstrated a consistent 40% efficiency in converting 
power delivered by the rowers to the oar handle, as 
measured by fixed-seat ergometer tests, into the power 
===== PAGE 248 =====
31. Battle Manoeuvres for Fast Triremes 235
needed to overcome the resistance of the water to the 
passage of the hull and rudders. These were achieved in 
bursts with durations of a few minutes designed to achieve 
a maximum possible boat speed; Taylor (above pp. 50–7) 
found a figure of 43%, with Shaw (1993, 58–68) quoting 
39% for previous trials. 
 Shaw (1990, 29) projects that the 1988 T rial’s Crew 
could ‘probably’ have delivered an effective power of 200 W 
per rower on the thranite and zygian levels for a maximal 
sustained 6-minute effort, i.e. a total of 23 kW for 116 
rowers. The Mark IIb design was proposed to ensure that 
all rowers deliver effective power, especially those on the 
thalamian level, and perhaps at a higher efficiency. An 
improvement in the effective efficiency of the oar-rig 
for a Mark IIb design to a figure closer to 60% should 
allow this effective power value to increase to 300 W per 
rower; 51 kW for full 170 oar-crew. A more modest total 
effective power of 40 kW, capable of being delivered at 
maximum speed and sustained for a few minutes, has been 
assumed for this modelling project. The durations of the 
manoeuvres discussed in this paper are all less than two 
minutes. Matching power output with the estimated drag 
gives a maximum speed of 9.9 knots with an effective oar 
thrust of 7.8 kN at that speed; see the intersection point 
of the two curves in Fig. 31.1.
 A variety of measured acceleration runs with 
Olympias, 
including some from standing starts, led Shaw (1990, 
25) to conclude that the effective thrust of the oar crew 
decreased, in a linear relationship, with increasing speed. 
A similar relationship has been adopted here and this is 
also displayed in Fig. 31.1. 
Thrust (kN) = 17.4–0.967 × speed (in knots)
6. Manoeuvrability for a fast trireme
The dynamics model, extended to incorporate the likely 
improvements in a Mark IIb design based on Olympias, 
has been used to investigate the expected manoeuvrability 
of an ancient fast trireme.
6.1. Speed changes 
Fig. 31.2 provides a graph comparing the speed of two fast 
triremes, one initially at maximum speed, 9.9 knots, and the 
other stationary. The acceleration curve for the stationary 
ship uses the force relationships discussed above; it reaches 
5.5 knots in the first 10 seconds, 9 knots at 24 seconds, 
and is effectively at full speed within 40 seconds. 
 The second curve illustrates a deceleration profile where 
the oar-crew stop rowing at the start time (zero seconds), 
turn in their seats to take over the oars of the oarsman behind 
them in the first 10 seconds and then begin rowing the 
ship backwards, initially providing additional braking until 
18 seconds and then accelerating the trireme sternwards. 
Throughout the deceleration phase of this manoeuvre the 
rudders are assumed to be fully flared, i.e. turned 67.5° 
in opposite directions, providing the maximum possible 
additional drag but no net turning effect.
Figure 31.2. Speed/Time graphs for an optimised Mark IIb fast trireme. The acceleration curve (solid line) directly uses the 
force relationships from Fig. 31.1. The deceleration curve (dotted line) is initially the result of fully applied rudders, set in 
opposite directions to ensure maximum drag but no turning. During this time the crew is assumed to be turning in their seats, 
taking the oar of the person behind and at 10 seconds placing their oars into the water to increase the braking force, assumed 
to be equivalent to the maximum thrust at zero speed (see Fig. 31.1). Once the vessel comes to a halt, the crew continues to 
pull the ship backwards (dashed line) with an effective oar thrust equivalent to 80% of their maximum forward thrust at the 
same speed.
===== PAGE 249 =====
Andrew T aylor236
 This method of rowing a ship backwards proved to be 
the most effective with Olympias despite the fact that she 
was very far from optimised for such work. Secure places 
to brace the rowers’ feet and more sustained practice with 
taking timing from rowers in the bow of the ship would 
both have improved the speeds obtained (see Taylor, above 
pp. 50–7 for a more complete discussion). An oar thrust 
equal to 80% of that possible with the crew rowing the ship 
forward has been assumed for the subsequent acceleration 
backwards from 18 seconds on. A final speed of 9.4 knots 
backwards is obtained with the hull drag being assumed 
to be the same as for forward motion. This speed therefore 
gives a plausible benchmark for a possible slow ancient 
trireme. The remainder of the manoeuvres discussed in this 
paper all compare fast triremes interacting with each other.
 Incorporating distance travelled into the simulation 
allows for the comparison between a fast trireme, at full 
speed, approaching an initially stationary one. Fig. 31.3 
illustrates a moving ship approaching to within 170 m of 
a stationary enemy and still being able to stop, then back 
away with relative immunity. 
6.2. Turning circles
T urning a ship inevitably involves increasing the drag forces 
acting against the direction of motion, both from increased 
rudder drag and the deflection of water by the hull. In a 
rowing boat the increased heel associated with turning 
also acts to reduce the oar thrust available to continue to 
overcome this drag. Olympias was designed to allow for 
a maximum heel of 3 degrees and there is clear evidence 
that boat speed was significantly affected by changes even 
smaller than this (Taylor, above pp. 50–7). At a projected 
maximum speed of 10 knots the tightest turn that a trireme 
with dimensions similar to Olympias (or any other vessel 
constrained by the dimensions of trireme ship sheds, e.g. 
Mark IIb), whilst allowing a maximum heel of 3 degrees, 
has a diameter of 140 m. This calculation also requires some 
mitigation by the non-rowing deck crew of the trireme 
moving to the inside beam of the ship, rather in the spirit 
of the passenger of a racing motorcycle sidecar combination. 
 Fig. 31.4 illustrates two possible turning circles where a 
trireme turns back to reverse its course, an anastrophe. The 
first, a ‘fast’ turn, where the trireme maintains maximum 
possible boat speed, 9.5 knots, with the full oar crew 
rowing and a modest, 22.5°, applied-rudder angle. This 
gives a turning diameter of 145 m. The alternative, a 
‘tight’ turn, involves one side stopping rowing and the 
application of full rudder to achieve a turn diameter of 
80 m, but with a consequent drop in boat speed to 6.5 
knots during the manoeuvre. A tighter turn is possible, 
closer to the tightest 62 m diameter turn recorded with 
Figure 31.3. Backing away. A trireme approaching an enemy ship decides to stop and then back away from the encounter: an 
anakrousis. The aggressor, trireme A, is a fast vessel moving from left to right at its maximum speed of 9.9 knots. At 170 m 
from the stationary enemy it enters a full braking routine: rudders fully flared in opposite directions with the crew taking 10 
s to turn in their seats then applying an additional braking force equivalent to the maximum thrust that they generate when 
stationary. Trireme A reaches a full stop after just under 20 seconds. Subsequent acceleration assumes backing away with a 
thrust that is 80% of what the crew can develop moving forward, with the ship reaching a maximum speed backwards of 9.4 
knots after 60 seconds. Simultaneous with the onset of trireme A’s braking, the reacting ship X (also modelled as a fast trireme) 
begins to accelerate attaining its maximum speed of 9.9 knots at around 40 seconds. The diagram shows the relative positions 
of the two triremes at ten-second intervals. After 60 seconds, trireme A has still avoided contact and is travelling, backwards, 
at a maximum speed of 9.4 knots.
===== PAGE 250 =====
31. Battle Manoeuvres for Fast Triremes 237
Olympias, with, for example, the oar crew on the inside 
providing some braking but with the boat speed dropping 
even lower during the manoeuvre. A lower entry speed 
would also allow a tighter turn.
 To estimate how closely a ship might safely approach 
an enemy whilst still being able to turn away safely and 
escape the immediate threat, a set of initially stationary, 
fast triremes have been modelled interacting with the 
approaching vessel. The image of a trireme, drawn to scale, 
is overlaid at ten second intervals with the initial positions 
and closely interacting pairs of ships shaded and outlined 
in bold. In a straight-ahead approach, a ship that begins 
Figure 31.4. Fast anastrophe and tight anastrophe. Triremes approaching an enemy turn back, an anastrophe, to avoid 
contact with a counter-attacking enemy. In each case the approaching ships are moving at 9.9 knots whilst the responding ships 
(assumed fast) are stationary; the onset of the turn of the attacking ship and the start of acceleration by the responding ship 
are simultaneous. The image of a trireme is overlaid at 10–second intervals with closely interacting pairs of ships shaded and 
marked in bold where they occur at the same instant. Dimensions are in metres
 Trireme A enters a fast turn, with a minimum speed of 9.5 knots in the turn and an effective diameter of 145 m. The 
maximum heel during the turn is 3.5 degrees, which with some remedial action by the deck crew to provide some counter 
balancing should allow the rowers to maintain full thrust throughout; as has been assumed here. The isolated ship X accelerates 
and turns to follow reaching 8.2 knots after 30 seconds but does not manage to ram trireme A. After 50 seconds trireme A 
has completed its turn and is still clear of ship Y. Provided an approaching trireme reacts promptly, they can safely approach 
to within 160 m of an isolated ship or within 250 m of a rank of stationary enemy vessels before turning away with a fast 
anastrophe. 
 Employing a more aggressive turning strategy, trireme B applies full rudder with only the port oarcrew continuing to row 
in the turn. This does not significantly decrease the minimum safe distance for approaching an isolated ship, trireme Z, largely 
because the speed in the tight anastrophe is reduced to 6.5 knots and it takes another 20 seconds or so to accelerate back up 
to full speed. The minimum safe distance from a rank of enemy triremes does, however, drop to 180 m for trireme C when 
entering this sort of tight turn. 
===== PAGE 251 =====
Andrew T aylor238
turning 160 m away from an isolated, facing, stationary 
ship will be able to remain clear. The threat zone increases 
to 180 m if approaching a rank of stationary fast triremes. 
More subtle approaches can significantly reduce these 
distances and they are discussed in the next section.
7. Battle manoeuvres for ancient triremes
7.1. Closing the gaps
A trireme rowing at right angles across the front of a 
rank of stationary triremes at a distance of 60 m would 
be relatively immune from being rammed provided it 
responds promptly by turning away if one of the enemy 
ships begins an attack run: see Fig. 31.5. On reaching 
the end of an enemy line the moving trireme could row 
around the end of the line, a periplous, as in Fig. 31.6. In 
this case the end ship has been modelled accelerating away 
in pursuit although it is still unable to catch the initially 
moving vessel. The presence of another vessel following the 
lead ship provides a considerable additional threat to any 
antagonistic response from the stationary ships. This sort 
of additional threat would provide a considerable incentive 
for the stationary fleet to adopt the sort of formation 
described as a kuklos, a defensive circle, without any ends 
to be rowed around, one portion of which might be as 
illustrated in Fig. 31.5.
 Fig. 31.7 illustrates a trireme rowing through a gap 
in the enemy line, a diekplous. A prompt response by the 
stationary ship on the far end of the gap would make it 
extremely dangerous to attempt the diekplous if the gap 
was less than 150 m, in this case. More aggressive turning 
strategies following the sort of approach course steered in 
Fig. 31.8 indicate that this gap could be reduced to at least 
130 m: see Fig. 31.9. The presence of following vessels 
would further constrain options for the stationary defensive 
fleet and might allow this minimum gap to be reduced still 
further. If the oars of any of the stationary ships were afoul 
of their neighbours then a yet smaller gap would suffice.
 Fig. 31.8 illustrates how a ship, initially approaching 
an enemy rank head on as in Figs 31.3 and 31.4, could 
Figure 31.5. Encirclement. One response to a fleet forming a defensive circle, a kuklos, is to row around them in an encirclement, 
e.g. the Athenians at the first Battle of Naupactus, 430 BC (Thucydides, 2.84.1). Provided that trireme A is about 60 m 
away from the stationary enemy ships, and it responds immediately, it can turn away and escape from any ship that accelerates 
out to ram it. Just such an event is reported to have been initiated by the Greeks breaking out of their circle at the Battle of 
Artemisium, 480 BC (Herodotus 8.11.1). Here and for the rest of the scenarios the dynamics of the counter-attacking ship 
have been modelled as those of a fast trireme.
===== PAGE 252 =====
31. Battle Manoeuvres for Fast Triremes 239
Figure 31.6. Periplous. On reaching the end of a rank of stationary ships that has not formed a circle the moving trireme A 
could row around the end of the line, a periplous, and attack the enemy from the rear. If the end ship Z turns and accelerates 
in pursuit, then the following trireme B is in a perfect position to ram Z provided that ship Y does not react too promptly; e.g., 
moving out as in Fig. 31.5.
Figure 31.7. Diekplous with following trireme(s). A gap of width 150 m is sufficient to allow a trireme to row through, a 
diekplous, with immunity provided that the defending ships do not react until the aggressor begins his turn. If the defending 
ships react earlier they will increase their vulnerability, as depicted in Fig. 31.11. Again, the threat of the following ship B may 
well dissuade Y from attempting the plotted turn, which would narrow the safe gap needed for a diekplous, although ship X 
could also react as in Fig. 31.5 and join the counter attack. Fifty seconds into the manoeuvre trireme A is inside Z’s turning 
circle and a threat to ships further down the line. If the oars of the triremes in the rank were entangled and therefore unable 
to be worked, then the gap required for a successful diekplous would be considerably narrower.
===== PAGE 253 =====
Andrew T aylor240
steer a course that would eventually have it moving across 
the front of the enemy rank at a range of 60 m as in Figs 
31.5, 31.6 and 31.7. Providing that the approaching ship 
turns away promptly in response to any threatening moves, 
then the illustrated track represents a path that allows a 
turn away to safety at any point in the approach.
7.2. Maintaining and disrupting more complex 
formations
A close-packed rank of triremes is a very effective defence 
against attacking fast vessels, with near neighbours 
providing protection against triremes following a leading 
attacker. However, it is very vulnerable to being disrupted 
by any sort of crosswind. Such disruption is certainly 
attested at the First Battle of Naupactus (Thucydides 
2.84.3) and in the initial stages of the Battle of Salamis 
(Diodorus Siculus 11.18.4). Therefore, waiting for a fast 
fleet to close would require a formation that allowed more 
room for station keeping whilst avoiding falling foul of 
neighbours, but also one that could quickly be converted 
into the more defensive closely-spaced rank.
 The starting formation in Fig. 31.10, illustrating twenty 
triremes deployed in four files of five ships, is proposed 
as having these requisites. This is exactly the formation 
adopted by the 20 triremes of the fast squadron deployed on 
the Corinthian right flank at the beginning of the Second 
Battle of Naupactus, 430 BC (Thucydides 2.90.1–2). Each 
ship has sufficient room to turn in place without disrupting 
its neighbours whilst still being able to maintain position 
against a wind blowing from any direction. The 100 m 
spacing between files allows the formation to turn internally 
to redeploy to the rear whilst keeping the separation less 
than that indicated as vulnerable to a diekplous, as in Fig. 
31.9. An error in files closing up to the left or right of the 
leading ships, for example as a result of miscommunication 
Figure 31.8. Steering for anastrophe or diekplous. By steering judiciously it is possible to approach an unbroken rank of 
enemy ships much more closely than is evident in Fig. 31.4, whilst at each point still being able to turn back and complete an 
anastrophe without being rammed. In this example ships, X, Y and Z begin their counter-attack 20, 40 and 60 seconds into 
the approach of trireme A, i.e., concurrent with the bold icons on the approach curve. The initially stationary ships moving 
out of the line accelerate as a fast trireme, whilst trireme A reacts instantly to enter a fast anastrophe. In each case trireme A 
manages to get clear.
===== PAGE 254 =====
31. Battle Manoeuvres for Fast Triremes 241
at the junction between two squadrons, could leave a gap of 
this size accidentally unfilled, emphasising the importance 
of this consideration. 
 Individual files are also shown moving into a single 
close-spaced rank of ships, taking up to 70 seconds to do 
so. The rear ships in a file containing more than about 
five triremes would not be able to react quickly enough 
to fill any vulnerable gaps in response to any incoming 
threat; the entire approach phase in Fig. 31.8 takes just 
60 seconds, and this is less than the time for the fifth 
ship in a file to reach the front rank. Maintaining files 
with more than five ships in a slow stationary fleet would 
probably therefore be a waste of resources. Deploying 
from column to line is frequently implied in the accounts 
of ancient battles. Iphicrates in 372 BC got his fleet to 
practice just such manoeuvres on their voyage to Corcyria 
(Xenophon Hellenica 6.2.28). Switching between file and 
rank in this way would be natural to those trained to 
fight in a hoplite phalanx. The similarity of such trireme 
manoeuvres to those performed by hoplites in a column 
is directly alluded to in Xenophon’s Constitution of the 
Lacedaemonians 11.10.
 A fleet that remained in this phalanx-like formation of 
files spaced at 100 m intervals would still remain vulnerable 
to an attacking squadron of fast triremes. Fig. 31.11 
shows that a fleet in such a defensive formation might 
well be pinned in place with just 30 seconds to react to 
any attempted ramming attack. The more concentrated 
attack on a single file shown in Fig. 31.12 provides a yet 
stronger attacking option. 
 A squadron of 10 fast triremes in a single file could be 
organised to ensure an almost continuous stream of ships 
approaching the slow, defensive fleet. Assuming that the 
file in Figs. 31.11 and 31.12, ships A to D was extended to 
include ships E to J, then while the first ships were turning 
away and repositioning the second half of the file could 
be making the sort of threatening runs illustrated there. 
The ships would be conducting a series of turning-back 
or anastrophe manoeuvres whilst looking for a vulnerable 
point at which to execute a breakthrough, a diekplous 
Figure 31.9. Diekplous of a rank. Triremes nearing the end of the arc rowed in Fig. 31.8 and following a slightly more aggressive 
turning strategy than in Fig. 31.7 can penetrate a gap in the defensive rank of triremes that is as narrow as 130 m. Forty 
seconds into the diekplous trireme A, moving at 7 knots, is inside the turning circle of Z, itself moving at 6 knots, and clear of 
its ram. Ship Y is vulnerable to the threat of B which in turn must be wary of ship X. A formation organised to defend against 
a diekplous should ensure that the ships in a front rank are more closely spaced than this gap.
===== PAGE 255 =====
Andrew T aylor242
Figure 31.10. Close formation of a 
slow fleet.  In this formation twenty 
triremes are arrayed in a grid with 
four files of five ships. In this case the 
second file, X–X is shown forming a 
close-spaced rank with ships arriving 
between 30 and 80 seconds after the 
start of the manoeuvre. File Y–Y 
illustrates that the 100 m spacing 
between adjacent files provides just 
sufficient room for the triremes to 
turn through 180 degrees without 
running foul of their neighbouring 
files if required to be redeployed to 
the rear. In a crosswind blowing 
from the top of the page it would be 
easier to maintain formation with 
the trireme’s bows into the wind, as 
in file Z–Z. Deploying from this 
orientation into a rank sees ships 
arriving between 20 seconds for the 
lead ship to 70 seconds for the last. 
Figure 31.11. Attacking files, 
multiple threats. A squadron of 
fast triremes which have steered 
in such a way as to complete an 
anastrophe or undertake a diekplous 
are rowing across the front of a 
stationary array of files. In the case 
of both trireme B and trireme C 
about 5 seconds separates the tracks 
leading to the opposite sides of X1 
and Y1, respectively. If the lead 
ships reacted before the illustrated 
start points for B and C then they 
could end up turning in the wrong 
direction to counter the attacking 
ship. Within 25 to 30 seconds of this 
decision point the attacking ships, B 
and C could be ramming either side 
of X1 or Y1. Provided that there is 
near-perfect coordination between 
Y1 and Y2 the 30–second interval 
ought to be sufficient to protect the 
lead ship of the file, i.e. Y1. The 
ships further down the file are too 
far away to affect the outcome of the 
initial encounter, e.g., X3 arrives 
too late to help protect X1 from C. 
Triremes A and D would preclude 
the lead ships from the neighbouring 
files W and Z from intervening.
===== PAGE 256 =====
31. Battle Manoeuvres for Fast Triremes 243
(cf. Phormio’s speech before the Battle of Naupactus in 
Thucydides, 2.89.8).
8. Conclusion: a tactical paradigm
Based on the above modelling, a tactical paradigm of the 
contact phase of a trireme conflict may now be proposed. 
A fast fleet will approach a defensively-deployed slow fleet 
in order to force them into a more secure close-spaced 
rank. The slow fleet will delay this as much as possible to 
avoid ships being blown foul of each other and creating the 
conditions that would make them especially vulnerable to 
a diekplous. They would nonetheless need to close up to a 
single defensive rank to avoid an attacking concentration 
on a relatively isolated file leader. If there was not an 
appropriate opening to press home the attack then the 
fast triremes could complete an anastrophe and turn back 
to await further developments. An attacking file of ten 
triremes could probably maintain an almost continuous 
succession of vessels approaching the slow fleet. A squadron 
near the end of the enemy line might instead undertake 
a periplous and row around the enemy force. To avoid 
exposing their sterns, the defensive fleet would need to 
Figure 31.12. Concentrated attack on a file. Two neighbouring squadrons of triremes, each in line ahead, are shown 
approaching a fleet in an open phalanx-like formation; their positions are shown over the next 30 seconds. The lead ships A 
and B simultaneously threaten both flanks of ship Y. The following triremes C and D preclude the ships from neighbouring files 
from intervening immediately. Conversely, if W and X do not move immediately to intercept C and D, then the concentration 
on file Y will continue to escalate rapidly. The approaching trireme N from the neighbouring squadron will give the lead ship 
from file Z pause, whilst M and those following N could continue to concentrate at the break-through point.
form a kuklos, a circle, or attempt to match the periplous 
with a similar movement towards the flank.
 The initial stages of the fighting would continue with 
the slower fleet trying to maintain formation and the fast 
fleet aiming to break it up. Aside from exploiting openings, 
this might extend to trying to tempt the slow fleet into 
moving out of their formation to launch a counter-attack. 
So the fighting would first be with “their ships in a mass 
and then scattered” as at the Battle of Arginusae in 406 BC 
(Xenophon Hellenica 1.6.33). The splitting of the Athenian 
force at the Second Battle of Naupactus, leading to two 
separate pursuits (Thucydides 2.90–91), and at Cynossema 
(Thucydides 8.104–105), provide possible examples of 
just such tactical thinking; the Battle of Notium, 407 
BC, perhaps provides an example that was less successful 
(Xenophon Hellenica 1.5.12–15).
Bibliography
Coates, J. F ., Platis, S. K. and Shaw, J. T . (1990) The Trireme 
Trials 1988. Oxford, Oxbow.
Lowry, I. J. and Squire, T. M. (1989) Trireme Olympias 
Extended Sea Trials Poros, 1988. Cardiff. 
Shaw, J. T . (ed.) (1993) The Trireme Project. Oxford, Oxbow.
===== PAGE 257 =====
